Speaker 1: characterise the core of liberalism? I mean, just initial glances looking at this, again, do you think this sort of like matches up with how we might understand liberalism in more contemporary terms? Do you think there's any potential sort of discrepancies here, just that sort of initial glance? All right, Jake. 

Speaker 2: With our current sense of liberalism, I feel like an idea like a quality would take a larger state in our current manifestations of liberalism than what I've seen. OK, good. Good. Yeah, Seth, what about you? 

Speaker 3: No, I was going to say something wrong. Yeah. 

Speaker 1: OK. Yeah, what about others? Any sort of, I guess, surprising elements about this, Yasmin? 

Speaker 4: Yeah, I think you mentioned that there is kind of a tension between the core or the importance of individuality and sociability. They're kind of against each other, to focus on the individual, but also try to focus on the people. Right. Yeah. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, I get you, Paul. Yeah, and that's a good point. And we'll have to see how liberalism as a whole sort of tries to bring those two together, because that's going to be an important theme, especially when we get to the new liberalism, both emphasize that even more there. So yeah, any other, Emily, do you have a? 

Speaker 5: Yeah, I thought power was kind of broad at a first glance, compared to all the other core concepts. You kind of have a bit of a sense of, oh, I know what's the interest with power. I was like, what context? 

Speaker 6: Right, yeah, good. 

Speaker 1: And yeah, in addition to that, again, some of you have mentioned you were kind of surprised by the quality being left out, any other sort of notable political concepts being left out here from the core. Something like democracy, perhaps. 

Notice that is not a core concept within liberalism. Okay, and we'll see later on next class why not. So that's just another question here again to think about. Again, especially when we're comparing, again, liberalism, this understanding, it's supposed to, again, roughly match up with our contemporary understanding. So again, as we go through it, just keep asking yourself, right, to what extent do you think it sort of matches up with our contemporary understanding of liberalism here? 

Okay. All right, so let's start with the concept of freedom here. Okay, so as we know from our discussion from last class, right, the IC of freedom is this idea of non-constrained. 

Okay, but we also saw again from last time that the idea of non-constrained has these quasi-contingent categories, right? Like what's doing the constraint? Who's doing the constraint? Right, what are they being constrained from? So the first aspect of the of liberal understanding of liberalism, okay, is what we can refer to as the sort of negative conception of liberty, okay? And this is again the idea of non-interference. So the basic idea here, right, is that when we're thinking about non-constrained, that is when we wanna think about what makes individuals free and necessary component of that is that individuals actions should not be constrained by the actions of others through force or coercion. 

Okay. And so again, this idea of non-interference here is again what we're referred to as the negative conception of liberty. So this is going to be a fundamental aspect of the liberal understanding of freedom here. So things like this, right, when we think about this negative conception of liberty, again, I think of like freedoms like a free speech, right? Freedom of expression, of action, these sorts of things, right? These are all negative freedoms, okay? The idea here, right, is that either other individuals nor the state should be interfering with these sorts of things, okay? 

Okay. This is again a necessary aspect to understanding freedom for the liberal, but as we're going to see, what's going to end up distinguishing liberalism from a number of other political ideologies is that liberalism is going to have a more expansive understanding of the concept of freedom, okay? And it's going to move beyond just this negative conception here, okay? And this difference will be again a significant difference between liberalism and a number of other political ideologies, okay? Because what we'll see is that a number of other political ideologies, even something just like classical liberalism, for instance, they'll interpret freedom exclusively in these negative terms here, okay? Liberalism will move beyond that, okay? 

So how does it do that? So as a freedom says, again, he's using a meal as a basis here, right? And meals says, okay, well look, free individuals should be free to pursue their own good in their own way, right? Now, when you sort of think about that, again, I mean, it may suggest this simply this sort of negative conception of freedom, right? That again, other individuals shouldn't interfere with our actions, the state shouldn't interfere with our actions, so essentially we should be free to do whatever we want, okay? However, what we'll see is that for Millite liberalism, understanding this notion of an individual's good, okay, is not going to be sort of just purely subjective, okay? And this is where it's going to open up room for this understanding of freedom that goes beyond this idea of non-interference, okay? 

So here's just a quote from Frieden. He says, if liberty is not merely self-determination, but the subset of self-determination known as self-development, okay? So again, non-interference necessary, okay, for self-determination, do whatever we want, okay? But that, from the liberal perspective, that's not the only reason that freedom matters, okay? And that's not the only way in which freedom is valuable for the liberal, okay? So from Mill's perspective, he understands this idea that individuals should be free to pursue their own good in more sort of objective terms, rather than in purely subjective ways, okay? So a subjective way of sort of understanding this is that an individual should be free to pursue whatever desires they have, 

Speaker 7: whatever desires, again, with the one caveat there, right, that their desires aren't violating the rights or harming other individuals, okay? But besides that sort of how ludicrous or 

Speaker 1: stupid, dumb, whatever their desires are, they should be free to do that. Mill is sort of blocking off that interpretation here, okay? Because he's introducing sort of objective components into this idea that individuals should be able to be free to pursue their own good, okay? So the good here is not understood in just purely subjective terms, but there's going to be these sort of objective terms and these objective elements are going to have to do with self-development here, okay? 

So again, if there's any questions, just feel free to stop me at any time, so. Okay, what we're gonna see here is this is going to introduce the second concept within the core of liberalism. The second core concept of liberalism is this idea of individuality. And again, the IC is there as the following as a freedom to find it, the notion of a person as a separate entity possessing unique attributes and capable of choice. Now here's the thing, what's good for individuals as we've seen, okay, is the free development of our individuality, okay? Is again, the development of these unique attributes that each individual possesses, okay? 

The development of their capacity for choice, okay? So individuality here, again, doesn't just mean sort of uniqueness, the fact that we may have subjective desires, right, our own desires to pursue. The idea here is that individuality refers to the harmonious development of our rational capacities, okay? 

And so this is where we get a meal for those like we took out one of my previous classes, meal draws a distinction, right, between higher pleasures and lower pleasures, okay? Really, what he's doing here is he's drawing a distinction between activities that involve our rational capacities versus activities that don't involve our rational capacities. Okay, so I mean to sort of just oversimplify the distinction we can think of like activities like, I don't know, sitting there watching the reality television all day, okay? Versus an activity that, again, something that develops your rational capacities, okay? 

I don't know, reading a book, okay? Now, here's again the idea, right? So individuality is again the development, the harmonious development of our rational capacities. So what's going on here from the liberal perspective is that freedom is being interpreted in terms of this concept of individuality, okay? The value of freedom is that individuals should be free to develop their rational capacities, okay? And in this way too, again, what we see, we'll see a sort of, again, a sort of mutually reciprocal relationship here, whereas again, individuality interprets what sort of freedoms are important, okay? So again, from the liberal perspective, it's not just necessarily the freedom to do anything we want, right? Again, it's not just the freedom to follow any sort of subjective desire we want, okay? It's again the freedom to develop our individuality here. 

Okay. Then the other aspect, right, is that again, individuality helps interpret, understand what freedom is, right? Why it's valuable, okay? Freedom for what purpose? Again, to develop our individuality, okay? But then again, the concept of freedom is helping interpret again individuality on the other end as well, because again, the idea here is that individuals shouldn't necessarily, again, be coerced to develop their freedom, or to develop their rational capacities. 

It has to be the product of their own free choices, okay? So again, the idea here is that from the liberal perspective, freedom and individuality are working together to interpret each other, okay? What sort of freedoms are valuable from the liberal perspective? The freedoms to develop our rational capacities, okay? But again, even though the goal here, the purpose is to develop our rational capacities, individuals can't be forced to develop their rational capacities. They have to develop those rational capacities by making free choices for themselves, okay? And we'll see that this sort of commitment to these concepts then will have sort of implications and ramifications, right? For other sorts of concepts within the liberal paradigm, for again, how other aspects of society should be set up to facilitate this sort of relationship here. 

Speaker 6: So now again, here's another question for you all, right? Again, we started by saying, freedom says, male-like liberalism is close to our understanding of contemporary liberalism. Thinking about that point and what we've just discussed about, again, this focus on developing our rational capacities, do you all see that as comprising a fundamental feature of our contemporary understanding of liberalism? 

Speaker 3: Seth? I feel like I probably wouldn't because I feel like our contemporary understanding of liberalism is more have the freedom to do whatever and not to put those, like he says, it's like objective constraints, but that's entirely subjective from his point of view. Like, what makes a higher activity, what makes a lower activity, those constraints are subjective. So because of that, I feel like it would probably go again to the division. 

Speaker 1: Okay. What about others, James? 

Speaker 8: Yeah, I agree. I think the freedom of the individual is still really important. And Seth said, like it's much more subjective now. It's free to do whatever you think is in your best good. 

Speaker 2: Jake? I agree, but I do think there are aspects of this that we still see coming up in terms of promoting certain, like allowing people to fully express themselves, but also trying to promote certain positive outcomes, like learning education, promoting welfare systems or things that can help people to elevate themselves. I think it is much less about that kind of almost paternalistic, like self-develop, get better, but there are still remnants of that, I think we can see in the term of what Bob? 

Speaker 1: Okay, good. What about others? Yeah, again, to what extent do you think this sort of specific understanding of freedom, right, matches up with our sort of contemporary understanding of liberalism? Do we think there's a potential discrepancy there? So just a question, when he talks about not having 

Speaker 8: legal coercion to what would his perspective be on something like taxed welfare state, where that's kind of your being, someone not in welfare state is being coerced to taxes to uphold that? 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so from that perspective, we'll see that liberals are fine with something like that for a number of different reasons. What they have in mind here is that there shouldn't be this very sort of a paternalistic, heavy-handed form of coercion to say, okay, you should pursue, I don't know, maybe a life around being like a chess master or something like that. Yeah, that sort of stuff. What about others on this? Again, do you feel like there's a match, potential discrepancy there? 

Speaker 9: It looks to our current conception has almost gone further than this one. Further? Yeah, we're like, I think it's like everything that people do is accepted as like an expression of individuality and is supported, or as this is more strict in terms of what will be supported, obviously. 

Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so yeah, when you mean further, you mean like again in the direction and more towards like the sort of like subjective direction. Yeah, very subjective. Okay, okay. What about others? So it sounds like again so far, most or some people at least think again, it doesn't seem, it presents a potential discrepancy there between our contemporary understanding of liberalism. I mean, if so, isn't that like again an issue given the fact that the way like Frieden again, his justification for picking Millie liberalism was that it matched up. And we see that these are the two core fundamental concepts of liberalism. So does that present an issue here? 

Speaker 2: Jake? I think it's really hard to down the majority of our modern kind of local ideologies to a strong theory. I think that while our current conception of liberalism may not be word for word how Mill describes it, I think that Frieden and individuality are still core tenants of our current political ideology. And if it's not maybe the exact like objective like self development, all that may not be like completely perfect on that, but I still think it's a good way to perceive kind of important, so certain things in your own sense. 

Speaker 1: But here's again, I guess another question. I mean, that I'm wondering about when you all are sort of again using this term individuality, in your mind, are you thinking of this just in the terms of like uniqueness of individuals, the fact that we all have our own desires? 

Because again, that's not just the way that these liberals are understanding it, right? Individuality again refers to sort of the harmonious development of our rational capacities. So I'm wondering in your mind, which way are you sort of like thinking about individuality when you say it's still sort of like playing an important role in contemporary society? Are you thinking of it again just in terms of these like the subjective component, everyone has their own subjective desires, right? Their unique desires they wanna pursue. One reason I ask that is because that's going to be how classical liberals interpret individuality in purely the subjective way. That we all just have again, have our own unique desires or unique attributes, so we should be free to pursue whatever we want. Which again would then take me back to the question that, is it that classical liberalism that matches up with our contemporary understanding? 

Speaker 3: I feel like the hard part for me is tying together the harmony with the individuality and like the sociability that we're talking about earlier. Like those things to me are kind of really hard to fit in the same bubble per se. So yeah, I don't know how they would kind of justify that. 

Speaker 1: We'll see, when we get to new liberalism in particular, we'll see because that's going to be a significant point of emphasis for greed. And we'll see really how these sort of articulates the connection there. So, Jake. I think I see the biggest 

Speaker 2: expression of this individuality in additional education. Okay. In making education mandatory for people up until a certain point in education a priority, I guess. I think that helps, in self-development is really important. It allows us to explore rationality and develop our rationality in a harmonious way. And I think that if we look at it purely from it, you can do what you want, you're your own person. There may be less of a push to place yourself in education and continue to focus on education. Right, yeah, right. 

Speaker 1: Do you also think, what about like, do you all feel that there's any sort of like emphasis in contemporary society on a focus on autonomy? Because usually when we think about autonomy, the idea of autonomy is that it's a more sort of independent and reflective way of making choices about what we want to pursue in our lives. So in this way, again, the idea here is that, our choices and our decisions may be influenced by all sort of external factors, like media advertising, these sorts of things. And so the autonomous individual is an individual who's exercising their rational capacities to reflect about these choices in order to make an appropriate choice, one that reflects their values. So another way of thinking about individuality here is if we see any sort of emphasis on autonomy, then perhaps that's another sort of connection here with individuality from this liberal perspective. So is that something we potentially see in society? Hope, did you have your hand up? You didn't have to answer that question. 

Speaker 10: Yeah, I was just like on the topic of education, I think the way that individuality is kind of marketed, I feel like in today's state is like in the form of like uniqueness, especially when you think of like higher education, and then it has to do with like the philosophical liberalism. I feel like it's like college admissions first, for example, it's like always looking for like individuality, and I think a lot of people read into that as like uniqueness, rather than I guess, the harmonious or self development aspect. 

Speaker 6: Hope, good, cool. 

Speaker 11: Yeah, I like what Brooke said too, the subjective aspect. I also think that it was a middle, we said that good is subjective. Yeah, I am. I think the contemporary understanding of liberalism is much more subjective, individual with good, and it says that an individual is good, is more important than society is good. 

Speaker 6: No problem, yeah. 

Speaker 1: And notice too, I mean, when we think about it, we'll see this again later on too, but from the liberal perspective, right, even though they think about the good in relatively more objective terms, it's not completely objective, right? The idea here is that you should pursue a good where the good is defined in the development of your rational capacities, which can still leave a very wide scope of activities over putting the vision, right? It's just again, the idea here is that like, I guess if an individual again chooses to pursue a life, I don't know, just sitting on the couch, watching reality television all the day, that would be an example of something that wouldn't be compatible with that, right? 

But besides that, we could probably think of a number of different sort of professions, career paths, lifestyles that are sort of compatible with, again, this development of our rational capacities. What do you have, other hand, Louise? 

Speaker 5: Thank you. The idea of like certain like welfare benefits based on what you as an individual are doing, you kind of lead to that idea of liberalism being tied to development of like the personally like rational. 

Okay. Like, you know, you don't, like you don't get certain benefits once you like prove that like as an individual, you are like trying to put down a job and you couldn't do these things that are as 

Speaker 6: good as you are. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, again, I mean, this is going to be important because what we're going to see is that, is this commitment to a freedom and individuality in this particular interpretation, that's not only going to influence the interpretation of the other core concepts within liberalism, but it's also going to play a fundamental role in interpreting again many of their policy proposals, right? As again, some of you have already mentioned. So like a commitment to something again, like education or universal healthcare. These sorts of things are going to be justified in the end on the grounds that they're necessary for things like this. Okay, for the development of our rational capacities. Good to know. 

Speaker 12: I guess I'm just confused with the definition of rational capacities because like if we're saying it's like the capacity of an individual and not conveying between so many things, like your example of this and I'm just like sitting on the couch with watching like reality television, if they think the facts, the extent of their rational capacity and not what's going to give them the most good, how do we define what is actually rational capacity? 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so I mean, it is something you're right that it's something that would certainly vary from individual to individual. And so in that case again, maybe for some individuals, if they do have a more limited rational capacity, that could be something that would fit with that. But in general, I guess if we're looking at it from like a sort of average perspective, things like that. But it's again, yeah, it's just something we have to sort of take into account from an individual perspective. But that's again, I think also why it also leaves sort of wide discrepancy also, right? Because again, it's going to vary from individual to individual and there's going to be so many different lifestyles that can still be compatible with that, right? But again, the general idea here is that it should be when we're talking about the harmonies development of our rational capacities, we're just talking about like the development of the self in different avenues, the utilization of our reason, these sorts of things. 

Oh, wow. Okay, so let's go ahead and move on then to the next core concept, which is going to be the concept of progress, okay? So the IC for progress here is movement from less to more desirable states, okay? So again, the IC right fundamentals is sort of understanding this concept here. So the quasi contingent categories for progress are the following, there's going to be two of them, right? 

How does this movement occur? The movement from the less to the more desirable state and two, how do we determine what the sort of more desirable state is, right? What's the sort of end goal of progress here? Okay. What we're going to see is that again, these core concepts of freedom and individuality are going to play a fundamental role in helping us answer these two questions from the liberal perspective. 

Wow. Okay, so let's start with this first question. How does the movement occur? So from, it's possible to offer all sorts of different explanations for how change occurs in society, right? How progress occurs in society, okay? So for instance, again, we might sort of offer an evolutionary explanation, right? For how or why we observe changes in society. Or we might offer the materialist, so this goes back to the Marxist, right? 

That we talked about on the second day of class, okay? So again, the Marxist explanation, right? Is that we observe changes in the way that people try to satisfy their basic economic movements, right? So that's again the materialist explanation. We can offer again a very sort of like deterministic explanation if we want. We could offer again one that's superimposed by like the plan of God, right? The will of God, okay? These are all different ways in which again, a theorist may explain how change occurs in society. 

Okay? So does anyone wanna guess how does the liberal explain how change occurs? Does anybody remember from the reading or from what we've discussed about the core concept so far? That'll give you a basis for guessing. 

Speaker 2: John, Jake. Through the individual and through kind of development of the individual, the development of the society? 

Speaker 1: Yeah, essentially the idea here, right, is that the concept of freedom helps interpret, okay, how progress comes about. Freedom, or excuse me, progress in other words, okay, has to come about through the free actions of individuals. Okay? So again, this means that again, it can't be superimposed, okay, by some external force from the choices, the actions of individuals. 

Okay? Notice though, what we'll see is that if again, it's through the free actions of individuals, this will, it'll mean though, that society has to be set up in a way to facilitate those sorts of choices. So again, the idea here is if we take the concept of progress, progress, freedom is helping us interpret how progress comes about in society. So progress must be achieved through individual freedom. So again, what this means, right, is again, if progress has to be achieved through individual freedom, again, this means society has to facilitate and promote individual freedom, okay? But again, notice when we say promote individual freedom, we are not talking about, right, just the negative conception of freedom. We're talking about this sort of freedom here. Okay? So society has to promote this sort of freedom to promote the free choices of individuals. Jake? 

Speaker 2: So with these combinations with progress combined with freedom and individuality, to be capitalists or at least of that sort of meaning? 

Speaker 1: And can't you join us? Because it can't be freedom. Yeah. For freedom of indigeneity. Progress can't come from freedom of individualism and society. So yeah, that's a good question. So what we will see is both the middle-like liberals and the new liberals are committed to capitalism. But ultimately, they'll be committed to a much more sort of regulated form of capitalism that has to work in conjunction for the promotion of these sorts of goals. And so that will be a difference between the socialists on one hand who won't have the same sort of theoretical commitment to capitalism. And they'll also be different from the classical liberals and libertarians and conservatives on the other hand, who will have a different sort of commitment to a more sort of like unregulated version of capitalism. But yeah, all of the middle-like liberals, the new liberals that we cover, they all saw themselves as being committed to capitalism, not only because, again, capitalism instrumentally promotes individual freedom, but they thought, again, there was a good way of promoting these end goals here. 

OK, so this, again, explains that first quasi-contingent. How does movement occur? How does progress occur? Progress occurs through individual freedom. 

So again, what we're going to see, this again means setting up society in a way in such a way to promote this interpretation of individual freedom. Now, the second category, how do we determine, how do we distinguish, what is a more or less desirable state? In other words, another way of thinking about this question is, what is the goal of progress? 

So given everything we've said so far, how do you think the liberal would answer this question? What is the goal of progress? So is it just going to be utilitarian? 

Speaker 8: It's going to be, sorry, what? Utilitarian. It's just going to be having most people have the most highest level of rationality. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so what we're going to see is that this concept of individuality is going to help interpret this aspect of progress. So the idea here is that, again, the more desirable states, the states in which the liberal is trying to promote, is going to be a situation in society in which most individuals can develop their rational capacities. That's the goal of progress. So in other words, when we say like society is making more and more progress, we're getting to a state where more and more individuals are developing their individuality. 

So again, we see how both freedom and individuality are playing a role in interpreting this concept of progress within the liberal framework. So again, I think the important thing to recognize too at this point is what you're going to see for each ideology. There's going to be right and intimate relation between all the core concepts in an ideology. 

They're going to play a role in mutually interpreting one another. Again, I think maybe another thing to ask yourself is when do you think about liberalism today? Do we see this as the goal of liberalism today? If we could ascribe a goal to it. Do we think this matches up with liberalism? 

Speaker 8: James? I don't think so. I think especially today when we're focused on economic GDP and stuff like that, try to maximize that. Good, yeah. 

Speaker 1: So again, I mean, it'll be interesting because again, maybe that's another aspect in which it comes closer to something like classical liberalism. Oh, well. Jake? 

Speaker 2: Because also prioritize kind of looking at distribution and narrowing the discrepancy between wealth aspects, which I don't think is, I think that's a liberal perception of progress at this point. I mean, obviously advancing the entire society, but also having a more full society, which I don't think is at all representative of this conception of progress. 

Speaker 1: So we are going to see that for these liberals, they will have a concern with limiting economic inequality. Because they'll ultimately argue that if you have significant economic inequality in society, it's going to make it more difficult to promote something like this. So Jordan? 

Speaker 13: Just to help you understand this, so the most desirable states are the ones where the development of people's rational capacities at the max. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, just like the greater number of citizens are living their lives in which they've developed their rational capacities. 

Speaker 13: OK, so the aspect of an individual's creativity and individuality, is that taken to a factor of a state becoming more desirable, or is it more of just, I guess, complexity of it? Or is it like, well, I'm trying to say it's more of a diverse, or it's more out of ordinary? 

Speaker 1: I would say, again, maybe with more of what the first thing you said about the sort of creativity, because I feel like that maybe comes closer to the development of rational capacities. So the goal isn't necessarily, again, just to promote diversity for the sake of diversity. 

If that's what you're wondering. The idea here is, again, to promote circumcenses in which more individuals are living their lives in such a way that develops their rational capacities. That may mean that maybe there's more diversity, but it doesn't have to be. It could be like maybe more individuals are pursuing similar pursuits or something. It's just, again, that they sort of autonomously reflected, chosen those sort of lifestyles, or choosing lifestyles that develop their rational capacities. Yeah, so in that way, it's not like, yeah, the focus isn't on promoting diversity for the sake of diversity. The goal here is the development of rational capacities. That may lead to more diversity, and may not. I think that's the best way to think about it. Brooks? 

Speaker 14: Is there a number of definitions, or something up worthwhile development of your rational capacity? It seems like if you're searching for a society where the most people are able to do that, it seems almost impossible. It's like you're trying to get people the most free time and the ability to create. 

Speaker 1: Right. It's going to, I mean, again, yeah, I think a lot of it will come down to sort of how we think about that. But again, I mean, think about it, there's like a lot of different professions, career paths that could do this. Again, like, I don't know, becoming an architect. 

Right. All of these sorts of different things would serve as examples. And so, again, I think the idea here, right, is to, again, we'll see that the goal is to sort of like create society in such a way, right, that it facilitates the ability for individuals to make these sort of like meaningful choices in their lives, right, instead of, again, being like forced or stuck to do unfulfilling, unmeaningful work, right, that fails to develop their rational capacities. OK. And so, again, the idea here is just to be able to create circumstances that facilitate those choices for individuals without, again, necessarily requiring them to pick any specific choice. And so, again, what we'll see, again, like as some of you mentioned, right, that'll involve better education for individuals, right. Again, greater access to various economic resources, these sorts of things, because those sorts of resources as a whole will help facilitate, yeah, those sorts of choices. 

So, Maya and then James. I feel like this is a question of progress, kind of, assumes that everyone has the ability to like, kind of progress towards like their individuality 

Speaker 5: while today's version kind of focuses more on like breaking down systemic barriers as well. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I mean, I do think this will be compatible with that because the Liberals will recognize that for many individuals, they don't have the equal ability. And so, again, the goal will be to set up society in such a way to bring that about, yeah. 

Yeah, to me, I feel like the biggest difference I'm seeing is that in the middle-life version, there's a rational capacity is like the end, where if you have everyone that's being rational, that's good, whereas today, it's more of a 

Speaker 8: means to, like I said, have more economic development. 

Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah. Yeah, again, I think that's just gonna be something to keep in mind as we continue to move on with it. Because again, if that's the case, that may come be a little bit closer to something like classical liberalism, where those sorts of things seem to be like the end goal in itself. I hope that Emily in that said. 

Speaker 5: Yeah, I think modern liberalism also has a lot of emphasis on not just the end goal and the results, but the mechanisms that are being used to get there, like I'm talking about government and how democracy is something that I would consider pretty important to modern liberalism, that the way that individuals are participating in society as an extension of that self-determination. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, that is good. And we're gonna focus on that a lot next class, because that does play an important role for me. But we'll also see why freedom doesn't include it as a core concept there, as I said. 

Speaker 3: Yeah, I feel like the more desirable state has a lot of circular dependencies. Because the graph, I feel like it's kinda circular. And yeah, also in terms of a desirable state, I feel like, I guess my conception is more based on material and moral instead. Oh, I can develop my rational capacities, but if I am a terrible person stuck in an environment with a suffering abudge, but I'm reading a lot of books, I don't understand how that's really the most desirable state. 

Speaker 1: Again, yeah, I think liberal would respond and say, again, it won't really be possible for an individual to develop their rational capacities if they're suffering in poverty. So again, promoting their rational capacities will mean addressing all of these sorts of conditions. However, a difference here, again, and maybe this goes back to the point that James mentioned, is the classical liberal will perhaps sort of mention those things more as a sort of end in themselves. So the goal of society, we'll see from the classical liberal perspective, is just maybe to improve the material conditions of individuals, to allow them to again pursue their patterns of consumption, to pursue, satisfy whatever those desires are. But again, the liberal has again, yeah, different way of sort of thinking about that end goal there. But again, I do think we should see it as, at least from their perspective, they're going to say that developing their rational capacities means addressing those sorts of things, you mentioned. 

Speaker 11: Well, yeah, I just have a question. Is the harmonious development aspect, does that mean that people's rational capacities can't be different? 

Speaker 1: That they can't be? No, so when we talk about the, okay, that's actually a good question. So when we talk about the harmonious development, usually, I mean, what we're primarily referring to is the harmonious within an individual, not necessarily amongst a bunch of individuals. So it doesn't mean they all have to be sort of like pursuing. But again, yeah, the idea here is that from an individual perspective, they're trying to sort of like develop a harmonious life where the different aspects of their lives complement one another. 

Yeah. Okay, so let's go on to the next core concept for liberalism, and this is going to be human nature and rationality. Okay, so liberals interpret, again, human nature as possessing these two attributes, as being both rational and sociable. So this means, again, we again have to specify in a bit more detail what exactly this means in each case. And again, as you've perhaps noticed, the pattern by now, this means we can look to these other core concepts to help us understand how liberals are going to interpret this concept as well. So what we're going to see is that from the liberal perspective, rationality within human nature is going to be, as we could probably guess by now, right, connected to all of these other core concepts. Again, I mean, this will be an important point to notice to just keep in mind is that again, when we look at these different sorts of theories, each of these ideologies, we're going to see that they're going to have like different interpretations of human nature as well. Okay, and that's again going to play a sort of fundamental role in then articulating, right, how we sort of think society should be set up, right, to be compatible with human nature. Okay, so rationality as part of human nature plays, again, several important roles here within liberalism, right? 

The first one is that again, rationality is sort of connected to human progress here as well, is that it helps us serve as a means, okay, for sort of evaluating the current state of society, determining which aspects of the system of society we can then improve, okay? So here, what we're going to see that's going to be fundamental from the liberal perspective is historically, both for the middle-life liberals, the liberals who came after John Stuart Mill, both in England and in the United States, many of them thought that we could appeal to the social sciences more and more, the insights we get from the social sciences more and more, to help better evaluate the current state of society and to determine how to better improve society, okay? So this is going to be, let's say, a fundamental difference that we might see compared to something like conservatism or classical liberals, okay, so let me give you an example here. For the liberal on this point, right, let's say we take a particular phenomenon in society, let's say we use an example like obesity, okay? A classical liberal or a conservative might explain that phenomenon simply by appealing to something about human nature, that is the choices individuals make, okay, to explain that phenomenon in society. 

What the liberal is going to say is, hey, look, we can point to a lot of the knowledge we've gained from the social sciences to explain how different aspects of an individual's environment contribute to this phenomenon, okay? So again, we might notice how just the fact that something like poverty or even something like urban planning, the simple fact that, again, in poor districts, okay, maybe there's more McDonald's or people don't have public transportation, these sorts of things, these things play a role in contributing to something like obesity. So the idea here is that we can use these insights gained from the social sciences to then help determine what these sort of environmental causes of these phenomena are and then how to better address those phenomena in society, okay? And so the idea here is that the more insights we gain from the social sciences in this way, society as a whole can become more and more rational, okay? We can better respond to these sort of environmental influences and causes and better address them, okay? So in this way, we're thinking again of rationality on a sort of societal scale, at a societal level, okay? 

Society becomes more and more rational when we better understand the various contributing causes, the environmental causes and how to address them. And then again, the second aspect of rationality here, right? Comes to the end goal of progress and individuality. So here again, we're thinking about rationality on an individual level, okay? Again, especially, I mean both of these points in particular, but especially the first point, this is going to be a significant, significant difference between both liberalism and socialism on one hand and then views like classical liberalism, libertarianism, conservatism on the other. Liberalism and socialism ultimately think that we can employ human rationality, human reason to better understand society and how to better alleviate various problems in society. 

Classical liberal libertarians and conservatives take a much less confident view towards that, okay? They think that human reason is incapable of understanding these sorts of things. We can't appeal to human reason to address these problems and when we do, that's going to create greater problems in society. 

Speaker 3: So what do we appeal to instead? 

Speaker 1: In some cases, we just let things go as they will, the choices of individuals, it'll depend, yeah. So any other, yeah, Jake, go ahead. 

Speaker 2: So what do liberals describe into like a Marxist theory of kind of history and class leaning toward something or just more looking at society and the whole of systemic impacts on situations? 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so the latter, the first one I think would be to sort of like deterministic, yeah, from the liberal perspective, yeah. But again, yeah, they do want to be sensitive to those sorts of environmental aspects, the social causes that lead to these sorts of things. Any other questions, thoughts? Again, especially about that first one, again, I think that's going to be a significant cleavage point between liberalism and socialism and other ideologies. 

Speaker 2: I think that does manifest more in our current political thought, I think there's a lot of pointing toward systemic and cultural societal factors and explaining things from a liberal perspective at the moment. I think that's a pretty clear parallel in my opinion. 

Speaker 1: Okay, good. What do you all feel, I mean, do you all feel we can briefly discuss this now, but I mean, I guess one way of thinking about it is like, should we, I guess have, I don't know if I want to use the word faith, but I guess confidence, right, in like the sciences, the social sciences, can we use these, tap into these disciplines as a sort of resource, right, for better understanding social problems, systemic issues, and then as a way for solving them? Or is that something, again, maybe we shouldn't be so confident about? 

Speaker 3: I feel like whatever we can do to try to solve those issues, we should. And like, it felt like the alternative was kind of like a non-answer in a way, or like just a lot more vague. So like, you know, there's a reason why the social sciences exists, and you know, if they can help in that problem, and I think we should use it. 

Speaker 1: Are you using the good random? Yeah, I just had a question. 

Speaker 3: So I was wondering how would you contrast like liberal rationalization of society with the other ideologies and have that approach at least question. 

Speaker 1: For now, again, the most I can say is to sort of put it in crude terms for now, until we get like to liberal or conservatism and libertarians, it's going to depend. So like, classical liberals will give a different explanation than conservatives as to why we should, okay? So like, the conservative, the explanation in a nutshell is that when we look to the different aspects of society, these things are essentially out of human control, and when you try to interfere with them, you're going to create more problems and more damage. Okay, from the classical liberal perspective, their explanation is that we should take, instead of trying to sort of like directly address these problems, what you have to do is take a more indirect approach. So like, an invisible hand approach, right? You just give people the freedom to do what they want, and eventually the market will work in such a way to correct these sorts of issues. 

Oh, wow. Whereas again, the idea from the liberal and socialist perspective is you have to make these things a much more sort of conscious focus of the government and directly implement changes with those specific goals in mind. So that's the sort of nutshell for now until we get to those. 

Speaker 15: There's some examples of technocracy and the application of social sciences. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so I mean, again, I guess just one example is like again, the obesity example, right? So you can say, look, we noticed this one sort of phenomenon in society. 

Why has this occurred? Again, one explanation you could offer is, hey look, it's just people are lazy, it's the choices they make, they want to go to McDonald's. Another explanation is you could say, okay, well look, here are various, again, social factors playing their role in this. Maybe something like poverty. 

Maybe something like urban planning. These things again contribute to poor food decisions. Again, maybe it's something even just like the availability of bad food choices, processed food, these sorts of things. Okay, so there's all sorts of, again, different aspects of society in which we can appeal to these sorts of insights given to us by various social sciences to help better understand why these various phenomena occur. Again, I mean, another sort of example is why might we notice again like racial disparities in education, in educational outcomes? 

What's the explanation for that? Again, you could offer different sort of explanations and the idea here is we try to look to the social sciences to see again, maybe it's again the result of poverty, right? Poor educational opportunities, these sorts of things, right? Again, housing, all of that sort of stuff. Okay, so these would be again, yeah, just a couple of various examples. Seth, did you ever hear them? 

Speaker 3: Yeah, I mean, I feel like it's important to look to the social sciences, but also to not then discourage the personal responsibility aspect that a more conservative ideology might have, where it's like you can look to them as a source of explanation, but ultimately speaking, you can try to change the structure, but it's also like, we are all individuals at the end of the day, so. 

Speaker 1: Right, Jake? 

Speaker 2: I think the social sciences provide a very helpful explanation, but I think it's also important not to view it as an absolute truth, because there are numerous factors involved and it's not like a science experiment where you can say, extract a variable and look specifically at a single thing, so I think they can be really helpful in terms of finding explanations, finding opportunities to improve things, but they're not an absolute truth that we can prove that this is the factor that causes this thing. 

Speaker 1: Right, right, and yeah, the social sciences, right, their conclusions are often statistical, right, and so in that sense, it's not completely deterministic or causal in that sense. So, and again, maybe that sort of like, again, motivates the sort of like classical, liberal, and conservative critique of both liberalism and socialism, right, is that, again, the idea that they're worried that liberals and socialists are too much trying to like, design and set up different aspects, right, and the point here is that they think that's just beyond human power and human control, right, society's very complex, the economy is very complex. When you try to interfere with these different aspects, there's going to be all sorts of unintended consequences. So the safest thing to do is to not interfere. Oh, wow. Emily, did you have your hand on? 

Speaker 5: What I was going to say was basically what he said. Oh, wow, oh, wow. Hope. 

Speaker 10: How do you measure like rationality as an end, or is it just like kind of an ongoing goal, like how do you say like, oh, we've reached rationality, like we're a liberal system? 

Speaker 1: Yeah, they don't think we'd ever like completely achieve it, it's just, yeah, it would always be an ongoing goal in that sense. And then so in that way, that just always means that if it is an ongoing goal, that means there's always a sort of like impetus to make sure that society's is set up in a way to help promote and facilitate that goal. 

Speaker 15: I guess I have a very interesting how like the attribute of rationality to social matters, but as talking about individuality at the end, because how does that connect to the individual power to reinforce this kind of progress? Right. And like how do individuals can navigate through these complexities in a social level by like utilizing their power? 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so that comes back to the question that some of you have raised, like what's the connection between like individuality and like the social good, the common good? We'll say more about that when we get to new liberalism, because I think someone like T.H. Green develops that connection much more than someone like Mill does. Mill, we'll see, he just kind of focuses on sociability, and that won't necessarily sort of explain that connection that you're wondering about. 

But when we get the new liberalism, that connection will become much more explicit for someone like T.H. Green, so. So any other questions, thoughts at this point? Let me see what else we have. We'll do that next time, so. Since we're just about out of time here. So any last remaining questions, thoughts before we wrap things up for today? About what we discussed. 

All right, so next time we'll continue on with the core of liberalism, we'll finish that up, and then we'll get to the adjacent concepts of liberalism. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. 

Last time we discussed what Frieden doesn't mean by political ideology, right? 

So today we're going to turn to what he does mean by political ideology. Before we start, again, I'm kind of curious to hear how the reading for today goes. Okay. Okay. Anybody else? No. No. Okay. Okay. Sorry. 

Emily, right? I thought the metaphors were helpful. I don't think I would have, um, I don't know. I think I would have struggled a lot to understand what he was trying to say. Right. Like I said, I feel like the reading for today was probably the most difficult one for the entire semester. 

So at least you don't have to worry about that. I think, again, after today, it'll be much sort of a less abstract and more concrete as he gets to start describing the actual political ideology themselves. All right. So let's go ahead and turn to, again, what he means by ideologies, right? So according to Frieden, what exactly are ideologies? So I think the easiest way in a nutshell is that political ideologies are essentially collections of political concepts. 

Okay. I think that's just, again, the easiest way to think about it in a nutshell. So each, again, political ideology, just think of it, again, as a grouping, a collection of various ideologies, or political concepts. 

Now, as we'll see, right, again, there's, I mean, more to this, but I think in a nutshell, that's the sort of basic idea here. Now, when we look at these political ideologies in each one, we'll see that they differ in essentially three different ways. Okay. 

The first one here is that we'll see if ideologies are just collections of political concepts, we'll see that the first way in which they differ is which political concepts they choose to include, right, within that grouping, within that collection. Okay. So again, maybe to use, again, Frieden's, you know, our furniture analogy, the room analogy, right? One idea here is, again, sort of which pieces of furniture are going to be included, right? So, again, we'll see that maybe some ideologies will include, like, I don't know, a kitchen sink, right? Another ideology will not include a kitchen sink, but like a bathtub, right? So, again, the first difference here is, again, just which political concepts they include within that collection, within their framework. Now, the thing is here is it doesn't necessarily follow that each political ideology will just be committed to different political concepts. Okay. So, it doesn't mean, right, that just because one political ideology is committed to freedom, that another political ideology is not also committed to freedom. Okay. 

So, it's perfectly possible for two ideologies to be committed to the same political concepts, but what we'll see is that in many cases, even when they are committed to the same political concept, they'll have very different interpretations of those political concepts. Okay. So, we'll see, like, when we talk about a couple different versions of liberalism, like the new liberalism or high liberalism, and we compare it to classical liberalism, we'll actually see that for both of those ideologies, they're committed to very similar political concepts, okay, but they have very different interpretations of many of the concepts within their framework here. 

Okay. So, that's, again, I think an important difference as well, is that, again, in many of these cases, we'll see that, again, especially in the case of, like, different versions of liberalism, libertarianism also, they'll be committed to similar political concepts, but they'll have very different interpretations of those political concepts. And so, one thing we'll want to be more sensitive to, right, is exactly how these different ideologies are interpreting these political, the same political concepts in different ways. Okay. Because we'll see, again, that when they do interpret these concepts in very different ways, I mean, those different interpretations will often be very antithetical to each other, right, and they'll give us sort of very different pictures and accounts here, and so then we'll need to sort of compare and evaluate them, right, to see what we think. 

Okay. Then the last one here also, perhaps a more subtle difference, but the other difference here is, again, the sort of location of those political concepts within each framework. So to go back to, again, Frieden's analogy of the furniture in a room here, right, he mentions the point how, in some cases, essentially the idea here is that, you know, you can arrange the furniture in a room in different ways, okay. And for his purposes, what we'll see is that when we get to the actual structure of an ideology, the idea here is that the closer political concepts are to what he calls the core, the center of an ideology, the more important those political concepts are, okay. The further out from that core, then the less important those concepts are, okay. So, again, just to give you sort of one illustrative example of this, so like when we talk about liberalism, for instance, we'll see that the concept of property within liberalism tends to fall within the sort of outer bounds of its ideological structure. What that signifies is that the concept of property has less importance within the liberal ideological framework. When we compare that then to something like libertarianism, for instance, we'll see that the concept of property instead of being on the outer bounds moves to the core, okay. And what that again suggests is that from a libertarian perspective, the concept of property is much more important within its framework, okay. So, again, the other idea, the other thing we want to pay attention to here, right, is again the sort of specific locations of various political concepts. The basic idea, right, is that that signals the importance or lack of importance of a political concept, okay. So, again, if freedom is not within the core of an ideology, that suggests, again, it's of lesser importance for that particular ideology, okay. Okay, so, also, again, I mean, as we move through some of this stuff, feel free again to ask as many questions as necessary because, again, I realize that they will be a bit abstract. 

Yasmin? Yeah, could you just think of morphological as the structure, yeah. Think of it again as the sort of form, the framework. 

Okay. So, all right, so, if political ideologies are collections of political concepts, okay, one thing that's important that we need to understand is how is it possible to interpret the same political concept in different ways, okay. Now, the reason this is possible is it was in 1956, there was this one guy, Walter Brace Galley, he published the paper in 1956 called Essentially Contested Concepts, okay. What he argues in the paper is that there are many concepts that we rely on, not just political concepts, but many other concepts as well, and he refers to them as Essentially Contested Concepts, okay. What he means by Essentially Contested Concepts is that it's possible essentially to interpret these concepts in many different ways, okay. 

And these concepts are concepts over which individuals inevitably lead to many different disagreements over. So, I mean, again, take the example of freedom, for instance. So, I mean, especially I feel like in America historically, you know, everyone sort of will announce their commitment to individual freedom, right, and they'll say that freedom is very important. However, even if you look at this from a sort of historical perspective, right, and the use and development of the concept of freedom within US history, you'll see that when different groups appeal to that same value, that same concept, they're implicitly relying on very different interpretations of that concept. So, for instance, sometimes when some group or some individuals refer to economic freedom, maybe they're referring to freedom, they're referring to something like economic freedom or political freedom, right. And in many of these cases, again, people implicitly relying on different interpretations of these concepts, okay. 

And again, I think that's something that happens even today, right. And that's one thing I think we should all try to be more sensitive to, because I think, again, in a lot of contemporary discourse, right, again, people will appeal to all of these concepts, right, similar concepts, or at least they seem similar right on the surface, but again, implicitly, people are often very relying on very different interpretations of these concepts, okay. And so, again, part of our goal here for the course is to become more aware of those different interpretations, okay. All right, so, how, again, is it that it's possible to interpret these concepts in different ways? 

Well, Frieden in the reading for today, he lists a number of different ways. I'm not going to go through all of them. There's just two that are of primary importance for our purposes. The first one here is that why don't we take any sort of concept, freedom or equality. The idea here is that each of these concepts are internally complex, and so what this means, again, is just that these concepts themselves are made up of different parts or components, okay. So, again, in this case, right, each of these parts or components are what ultimately come together to help define the meaning of, again, that concept, okay. So, the fact that these concepts are made up of different components leads to the fact that we can interpret these concepts in different ways, okay. One reason is because we can choose which of these components we want to include under the meaning of a particular concept, okay. 

So, that's the first thing. The second thing here is that what also further complicates it is that the components themselves can also be interpreted in different ways, okay. And so that leads, again, to further possibility for disagreement, and then, again, the components of a concept can also then be prioritized in a different way, okay. 

And I'll give you all an example of this on the following slide as well. But so, yeah, again, I mean, so if we think about it right, ideologies are made up of different concepts. Concepts themselves are made up of different components, right, and these components have, again, can be interpreted in different ways. They can be prioritized in different ways as well, okay. So, we'll see this again with many concepts like freedom of quality, so on and so forth, okay. And it's because of these, we can disagree about these three aspects here that will get very different interpretations of the very same concepts, okay. 

We'll end up with very different interpretations of what individual freedom means, very different interpretations of what a concept like equality means, okay. And then, again, the other important point for our purposes here is that these concepts themselves, okay, as a whole, are going to, again, reflect both that they can reflect both value or disvalue, okay. So, again, if a political ideology, again, maybe like liberalism, if we see liberalism push the concept of property to its outer bounds, what that is, again, suggesting here is some potential disvalue or marginal value for that concept, okay. 

Where, again, if a concept is pushed within the core of an ideology, what that is, again, implying there is that there's significant value being attached to that concept, okay. Okay, so any questions at this point? Again, feel free to stop me at any point with any questions. Okay, so let me give you an example of these different components with one particular political concept so you can see how this is working, all right. So, if we take a concept like equality, okay, what we're going to see is that equality itself has different components, different ways of understanding it. So, for instance, before I put this up, again, let me just ask you all, like, when you think of equality, what are some different possible ways of interpreting or understanding equality that's spring to your mind? 

Jake? There's different types of equality, like racial equality, gender equality, like economic equality. Good, right, right, yeah. Any others people can think of, what else jumps to sort of your mind when you think of equality? 

James? The quality of outcomes versus the quality of opportunity. Good, good, right, both. I think of like human equality, but we don't relate to animals, right? 

Right, right, good, yeah. So, we say like human beings have this sort of equal moral equality, right, that again is different from animals, right? So, notice again all of these different components, different ways of understanding equality, right? 

So, this is again this first aspect here, right? You have different components that may be attached to the concept of equality, okay? You get again, you can have equality of opportunity, right? You can have political equality, equality of outcome, right? Economic equality, again gender, racial equality, all of these different ways of understanding equality, right? So, the idea here is, you know, which of these components do we want to include within our concept of equality, okay? Again, maybe one political ideology just says, hey look, maybe the only thing that matters here is legal and political equality, and we'll reject all of these other components, right? So, if that's the case, then you end up with a much sort of thinner, right, interpretation of equality, whereas maybe another ideology wants to build more within that concept of equality, right? Again, maybe something like equality of outcome or economic equality is an important ingredient, right? 

So, the sort of more we build into that concept, right, the thicker it becomes in that sense, okay? So, again, the first thing right here is which of these components do we want to include, right? And how do we want to prioritize that, okay? But then notice, again, there's a further complexity here, because let's say if we take equality of opportunity, and we want to include that as a component within our understanding of equality. The further complexity here is that there's actually different ways of interpreting equality of opportunity itself, okay? So, for instance, even if we want to include equality of opportunity, we have different ways of interpreting this, so a formal way of interpreting the quality of opportunity, right, is just to say, okay, well look, the same rules should apply to everyone, right? So, no one should be, let's say, barred or discriminated from, and let's say applying for a job, okay? But then a more substantive notion of quality of opportunities might say, well look, that's good, but by itself it's not enough. 

Maybe, again, we also have to address background inequalities, right, that prevent people from developing the necessary qualifications, right, to apply for a job, so on and so forth, okay? So, again, we can see right how quickly this becomes complicated, because we have to decide which sort of components to include here, and then each of these components may be, it may be possible to interpret them in different ways, right? And then we have to choose which ones we want to prioritize, okay? So, again, all of this explains why many of these concepts are essentially contested concepts, okay, different ways of interpreting them. Okay, so now, when we think about political concepts, Frieden identifies what he calls the ineliminable component of a political concept, so we can just refer to this as the IC, because it's a pain to say that every time, okay? So, the IC is, now, he says this is fundamental to sort of understanding each concept, okay? But he also says at the same time, it's not sort of intrinsic or logically necessary to the meaning, but it just results from the usage in a contemporary discourse. Now, an important point here is that even though the IC is necessary to understand a political concept, we'll see that in each case, the IC of a political concept or the political concept cannot simply be reduced to its IC, okay? 

And we'll see why there is shortly here. But essentially, think about it this way, the IC, just think about it is that it's ultimately sort of fundamental to understanding what the concept is, okay? And then, what we're going to see is that he makes another sort of, he introduces another term here, what he calls a quasi-contingent category. 

So, this one, that can be a little bit of confusing. So, what we're going to see is that these quasi-contingent categories are ultimately necessary for understanding the IC of a concept, okay? Now, they're necessary for understanding the IC, okay? But the reason he calls them quasi-contingent is because, as we'll see, again, I'm going to give you an example of all this on the next slide, but as we'll see is that it's possible to interpret these quasi-contingent categories in different ways, okay? So, what we'll see is that the category itself is necessary, but its quasi-contingent characterization comes in the fact that we can characterize it in different ways, okay? 

So, before I get to the example of how both of these work, are there just any questions at this point? I'm not sure if it's right or wrong, but you can't know what it means. You said, I don't know. Right, so what we'll see, again, and this maybe will become clear with the example, but the idea here is that the category itself is necessary. It'll be necessary to have this thing, but its quasi-contingent nature comes in the fact that you can define that category in different ways, okay? 

Sorry, I hope you can go on. Yeah, yeah. Is that IC, something that all political ideologies in general have in common? So, first think of the IC as pertaining to concepts, okay? And it is interesting in a certain sense, it's kind of interesting because Frieden, when he introduces this, he identifies it with some political concepts, but then I notice once he gets further in the discussion and kind of tends to drop out. But it technically is supposed to belong to all political concepts, so each political concept should have its own IC. 

Yeah. I'm just confused a little bit about the IC because the last slide, it was all about turtles all the way down, so they're cursive of, okay, what does this mean? Can we not just do the same for the IC? Why is the IC special? So, the IC, I guess, is special in the sense that he thinks it's sort of fundamental to understanding the concept. 

Like, we won't be able to necessarily understand the concept without the IC, but we'll see that the IC itself, because of these quasi-contingent categories, is still open to different interpretations. Okay. So, it's still going to be, in that sense, compatible with everything that we... So, each concept, where I will have its IC, and we'll see, because of these quasi-contingent categories, the IC will refer to, like, what sort of components are we going to include in that IC? 

How are we going to interpret them all of that? But the IC is, like, the fundamental layer that he thinks can't... For a concept. For a concept that he thinks, like, is, like, the one that's not really open up to interpretation, and the quasi-contingent ones are. 

No, so the IC itself will be open to interpretation, but the fact that it has an IC is not open to interpretation. So, the idea here is, like, again, I think I had this on one of the slides, but I'll say it now. So, like, for freedom, he identifies the IC as a non-constraint. So, his point is, we can't understand the idea of freedom without this idea of non-constraint. 

Okay. But, the idea of non-constraint is then open to different interpretations. And those interpretations fall in the quasi-contingent. Correct. Correct. Yeah. Beneath those? 

So, the quasi-contingent categories, they're the ones that open the discussion for the, you know, limitable components of interpretation. Exactly. Yeah. So, they can differ. Exactly, yeah. 

Depending on the ideology, like... Correct. Yeah, yeah. 

We'll see, yeah, that the ideologies will interpret these quasi-contingent categories for the IC for different concepts in different ways. Yeah. So, let me give you the example here. It'll hopefully help clarify this. 

Right. So, he uses the example of a table, right? He says, okay, take the concept of a table, right? 

The IC of a table is a raised surface. Okay. So, again, to answer your question, he said, the idea here is we can't understand this concept without that IC. Okay. So, the IC itself is fundamental. 

Okay. So, he says, now, where do the quasi-contingent categories come in? Well, the quasi-contingent categories are necessary to understanding this idea of a raised surface. Okay. 

So, in that sense, they're necessary, but they're quasi-contingent in that we can interpret those necessary categories in different ways. Okay. Because let me ask you this. We have a raised surface, right? Can you think of different ways in which we may have a raised surface? Like, what does it say to have a raised surface? 

Don't we need to sort of like fill that idea in a bit more? How exactly is the surface raised? What sort of surface is it? 

What is it made of, right? These are all the quasi-contingent categories. Okay. So, in this case, the quasi-contingent categories refer to the material of the surface, the color, the manner in which the surface is raised. 

Okay. Notice, right, these categories themselves are all necessary to understanding the IC, right? You can't understand a raised surface without these other categories here, right? You need to have a surface that's made of some material. It has a color. 

It has to be raised in a particular way, right? So, the categories themselves are necessary. So, again, can anybody then tell me where do their sort of quasi-contingent nature, where does that come in from? To say that it's quasi-contingent means that it's not necessary in that sense. 

James? So, every raised surface needs a material, but it could be what if we not open it up to it? Exactly, right? So, the categories themselves are necessary, but they're quasi-contingent because you can fill in these categories in different ways. So, you don't have to have one material, right? You can have, again, wood, metal, plastic, right? Think about, you can have different colors, right? 

The category itself is necessary, but you can fill in those categories in different ways. You can raise, you have a raised surface, right, in different ways. Some tables, they have four lanes. Some tables have three lanes, right? 

So on and so forth, okay? Again, the idea here is that the categories themselves are logically necessary to understanding the IC, but you can fill in those categories in different ways. So, again, one way to sort of think about this, like if we take the concept of a table here, we say that it's IC is a raised surface. 

What we have here, right? So, in order to understand this concept, in order to understand this IC, we have these quasi-contingent categories here, right, that refer, again, to color, material, and how it's raised. So, again, each of these categories is necessary, right? But then you can fill in these categories in different ways, right? And so when you fill in these categories in different ways, you end up with different tables, right? You end up with different interpretations, different tables, okay? What we're going to see, again, is political concepts work in the same way, right? So, you'll have a political concept here with an IC. You'll have these quasi-contingent categories that are logically necessary to interpret the concept, and then you can fill in those categories in different ways. You'll end up with a different interpretation of a political concept. 

No doubt. So, again, to use an example here, the one he uses, so if we take the concept of freedom, here, we take freedom, you know, he says the IC for freedom is a non-constraint, okay? So, this idea of non-constraint is necessary to understand, or fundamental to understanding the concept of freedom, okay? But this means that this IC itself, this idea of non-constraint has quasi-contingent categories, okay? 

Here are the quasi-contingent categories. Who is being non-constrained? But what are they not being not are constrained by? What are they being constrained at? 

What are they being prevented from performing, right? So, again, for this concept, we have who, we could say who, what, how. Okay. So, these are, again, all the various quasi-contingent categories. Again, they're logically necessary to understanding this IC of non-constraint, right? Because, again, we need to know who is being constrained, right? Which individuals? By whom are they being constrained? Are they being constrained by other individuals? Are they being constrained by the government? Are they being constrained by the lack of resources, opportunities? What are they being constrained from? That is, what are they being prevented to do? To do whatever they want to develop themselves as individuals, okay? How we interpret each of these means that we'll end up with a very different interpretation of freedom. So, again, to give you one example, maybe one ideology says, well, the only thing that really matters is for the who here we're talking about, let's say, all, again, in the citizens of a country. 

Okay? And, let's say, I guess, the how here is the only sort of constraints we're worried about is when the government or other individuals constraint. So that will give us a very sort of thin interpretation of freedom. Freedom here is when individuals are not being constrained by other individuals or the government. And then we can say to do whatever they want, to fulfill whatever their desires are, their subjective desires. 

But now notice maybe a different view will say, okay, well the how here other individuals and government is important. But again maybe a lack of access to resources, significant inequality in income and wealth is also a how here. It's a limiting constraint here. And maybe again the what here is maybe not just for individuals to fulfill any desires, but maybe there are more rational desires for instance. 

If that's the case then we end up with a very different interpretation of individual freedom here. So again the idea here is just as in the case of the table, the categories themselves are necessary. But again what's quasi-contingent about them is that we can fill in those categories in different ways. And when we fill in those categories in different ways, we end up with very different interpretations. And Seth this comes back to your point, it's about which components do we want to include, how to interpret them, which to prioritize. 

Colin? Yeah, I definitely like the metaphor. I think I'm confused about this. At a certain point like can't the quasi-contingent categories be so different that in essence it's almost a different concept? Good, good question. Yes, and he actually does say that. 

We'll see that up. In some of these cases the quasi-contingent categories themselves will actually refer to other concepts. Yeah, but what that means is that we'll see is that in some ideologies it essentially means that we can't understand political concepts in isolation from other political concepts. 

So within some ideologies it's as if different political concepts are playing this mutually interpretive role in helping us interpret each concept. So yeah. Alright, any other questions at this point? 

Ethan? Yeah. So in terms of prioritizing, even though these specific categories are like you can define them differently, are they the same weight as the IC? Or is it? 

Do they have the same weight? I suppose, I mean I guess in that case we might say perhaps not given that the... I'll say it depends though. 

I'll say it depends because it depends to what extent... I mean so far I've been saying that the IC are via a quasi-contingent category. The categories themselves are necessary, right? So if that's true, then if they're necessary to understanding the IC they seem to have sort of equal weights there, right? So in those cases we could say they would have equal weights, yeah. So in this case, so think about them again. I mean even when it's other sort of concepts, they will have sort of equal priority in interpreting the other concepts, yeah. Any other questions? 

Okay. Oh, yeah, again so just as I said here, right, as I illustrated there, right, so the quasi-contingent category is again the notion of the subject who's being constrained, the notion of obstruction, right? What sort of constraints are they facing? Again, other individuals, the state's lack of access to resources, income and wealth, so on and so forth, and what are they being obstructed from, right? 

Again, is it just to pursue whatever subjective desires they have, to pursue the rational desires, self-development, so on and so forth? Okay. So the next thing he introduces is the idea of a logical adjacency. So again, I mean the logical adjacency here is just referring again to how these quasi-contingent categories are being interpreted, right? Because again these quasi-contingent categories are logically necessary, right, to interpret the IC of a particular concept, okay? Again, the idea here, right, is, and colon, so this again comes back to your question, right, if again these are logically necessary to understand the IC, we'll see that in some cases these quasi-contingent categories refer to other political concepts, okay? 

So in this way, there's a potential here to have, right, different political concepts logically connected to each other. Okay. Okay. Okay, so any confusions, questions, thoughts, comments at this point, what we get are various. Okay. I think, Kira, I'll see, do you have an example of an ideology that could be logically adjacent to another concept? 

You mean a concept, yeah. Yeah, I think I actually have an example on the next slide, and if I don't, I'll mention one, but yeah, I'm pretty sure it's on the next slide, so. Is it okay then if I move on to the next slide? Yeah, okay. 

All right, so, oh, actually here's your example, I'll show you on the next slide. So, okay, so, yeah, the idea here, right, of self-development, so what we're going to see, like, for liberalism, for instance, right? So when we get to this sort of what, what are they being obstructed from, okay? 

Here's two different possible answers, okay? For the classical liberalism, what's important here is that individuals are just being obstructed from following whatever their subjective desires are. From the liberal perspective, what we'll see is that, what's important here is that individuals are being obstructed, prevented from pursuing their more rational desires, that is, self-developing in this case, okay? So what happens here, especially from the liberal perspective, this concept of self-development, okay, is another sort of concept here that becomes logically connected to the concept of freedom. 

Oh, wow. So for liberalism, what we'll see is that the concept of freedom has a logical and intimate relation to the concept of self-development, not necessarily just the idea of doing whatever we want, okay? Whereas for the classical liberal, we'll see that they interpret this just as pursuing whatever our subjective desires are, okay? So again, that'll be, we'll end up with a different interpretation of freedom in that case. 

Oh, oh. Just to clarify, so would the concept of self-development be the IC of something else, or is that the quasi-contingent? So it would be the quasi-contingent category of freedom, but then technically self-development would also have its own IC. 

Yeah. But again, it's interesting because even though Frieden says that each political concept has its own IC, he defines it for some of them and then he kind of stops doing it later on. But based on what he says, yeah, each political concept would have its own IC, so that would mean, right, that self-development has its own sort of quasi-contingent categories as well. Okay, so the next idea here is what he refers to as cultural adjacency, okay? And here's how he defines cultural adjacency. He says, cultural adjacency is a choice over which branches of a logical tree to climb, given that we cannot climb them all simultaneously. Okay. So again, what he's saying here, right, is we have all of these quasi-contingent categories, right, and we cannot fulfill all of these quasi-contingent categories at the same time. 

Okay. So it's easier, I think, to think of this back in the example of a table, right? If a table is, it has to be made of a material, right? But it can't be made of every possible material, right? The idea is that once you make it of one material, you're closing off the other possibilities that it can be made of, right? So the idea here is you have to choose, right, which material to make it, okay? And so what he's saying is that this idea of cultural adjacency is ultimately determining which, how we want to define, right, these quasi-contingent categories, given that we cannot define each one in every possible way. Okay. 

So again, the first one, what he says is, again, just the sort of a logical path, as I've been explaining, about how we want to define the quasi-contingent category. We're going to choose to make this table of wood. We're going to choose to make that table of plastic, given that we can't have the same table being made of every different type of material at the same time. Okay. So the idea here is that it's just choosing which way we're going to fill in these logical paths. 

Okay. So just think about this idea of cultural adjacency, right? It's just how we're going to fill in these sorts of nodes here, okay, these quasi-contingent categories. Then the second one is that what we'll see, right, within different cultural circumstances, it's essentially just refers to how these ideologies do fill in these quasi-contingent categories. Okay. 

The important thing about here is that in some of these cases, these quasi-contingent categories can actually be filled in in illogical ways. Okay. So the example of something like this that he discusses, he may say, okay, look, maybe at a given moment in time, right, a political ideology will be committed to political equality. 

Okay. But then when we try to fill in the IC and its quasi-contingent categories, we'll notice that members of a certain gender, members of a certain race, don't fall into that. And so that's an example of a sort of illogical connection here, right? We're committed to political equality, but then we're excluding all these other individuals, these groups, from that concept. Okay. 

Jay? So just to clarify, logical would be like a more theoretical approach, looking just from a concept-specific kind of understanding. And then the second type would be more of a like realistic, like this is what an ideology actually believes. So they both could be that way, right? Because yeah, when we even look at this first type, we'll see in many cases that the ideologies do fill them in illogical ways. It's just important to be aware of the fact that sometimes they could fill them in illogical ways. 

Yeah. But even for the first type, we're looking at, right, how do ideologies actually fill in these illogical connections, these nodes here? So again, yeah, cultural adjacency in general is just referring to how particular ideologies fill in these quasi-continued aspects for each concept. Okay. 

This point here is that when we look at this from a cultural perspective, right, at a given moment in time, ideologies can either do it logically or in some cases they may do it illogically. Okay. Alright. 

Any other questions about cultural adjacency here? Okay there. Alright. So, so far we've been discussing political concepts, right? So, we know that ideologies are collections of political concepts, right? So we start with the political concept, okay? 

Once again, the sort of fundamental aspect to the political concept that we've been discussing so far. The IC. The IC, right? So think of that again as sort of below the political concept, right? Helping us fill in the political concept, okay? Once again, then necessary to understanding the political, are they IC? 

The quasi-contingent categories, right? So again, these are sort of a level below that, right? Again, all of this is working to help define the political concept, okay? Then at the very top level, right, we have the ideology which is just a collection of various political concepts, right? 

With their own ICs, with their own quasi-contingent categories. Okay. So again, think back again. We get to his, you know, analogy with the furniture in a room, right? You have different pieces of furniture. Each piece of furniture has its own IC, right? 

With its quasi-contingent categories that can be filled in in different ways. Okay. Okay. So now what we want to do is, so far, right, we've just been looking at the political concepts themselves. So now we want to look at the morphology that is the structure of the ideology as a whole, okay? 

It's collection of political concepts. Okay. Wow. 

Okay. So when we look at an ideology as a whole, it's made up of about three different layers. So we have the core, then the adjacency, and then the morphology. Okay. And so again, he has, when we refer to the sort of morphology, we're talking about this whole here. 

Okay. This entire structure. So again, what we're going to see, right, is that each of these three different layers would be filled in with its own concepts. We have the core concepts, adjacency concepts, concepts in the curriculum. 

Okay. So the core concepts are the concepts that are most fundamental to identifying a particular ideology. So when we want to distinguish one ideology from another, when we want to identify an ideology, we do so by looking at its core concepts. 

Okay. These are the most fundamental ones. Now, there's a couple of complications I think about the core concepts here. So at one point, right, Frieden says that when we're thinking about different ideologies, it's not necessarily the case that the core concepts are necessary, right? To understanding them. Because this point here, the reason he wants to say that they're not necessary is because over time these ideologies can change. 

Okay. So what this means is that for a particular ideology, maybe you know, for certain moments of history, its core is constituted by certain concepts, but then later on in history, maybe some of those concepts drop out of the core. Right. Other concepts are introduced into the core. Okay. So in this way, again, the idea here is that we shouldn't necessarily think of the core as being completely fixed and static through all moments of history. 

Okay. And again, the other idea here too is that like if we wanted to, let's say, compare different versions of, let's say, conservatism, right? The idea here is that we would still identify them by their core. And the idea here though is that their cores should generally resemble each other. But it may be the case that like, let's say the core of one conservative thinker or in one country is maybe missing one concept or something like that. 

Right. But the point here, so what he's trying to say is that we shouldn't get always think of the cores of each ideology as being fixed throughout history in every country at every moment in time. We want to allow some variation, right? Because again, maybe it's a case that we wouldn't, let's say, again, just stop calling a view conservative maybe if we're just lacking this one political concept. 

Okay. But on the other hand, having said that, I think one other complexity is particularly when we talk about the case of liberalism, he seems to suggest at certain times that the concept of freedom is necessary to understanding liberalism as a political ideology. And that if the concept of freedom were to drop out of the core of liberalism, then maybe we would no longer identify it as liberalism. Okay. 

So when he makes some comments like that, that seems to suggest that in some cases, at least perhaps there are some concepts that are fundamental to understanding a political ideology. Okay. Because again, one thing we'll see is that when we compare liberalism with socialism, one of the differences is that liberalism includes freedom as a core concept. Socialism includes freedom as an adjacent concept, not a core concept. Okay. Now, one thing we'll have to discuss is whether or not we agree with some of his interpretations about these aspects. But this is just something that I'm highlighting here because I think there's a sort of tension in his own writings and his own thoughts about this and it's not always clear that again, on the one hand he wants to say when we're identifying these ideologies, the cores can change over time. Okay. But the other I think important point is that if a core starts changing too much such that it becomes completely different, then maybe we have to stop calling it by the same ideology that we were referring to it as before. 

Okay. So again, like if we think about it in the analogy of the furniture, right, if we have a kitchen which required like having a stove and refrigerator, but we can have like different sorts of refrigerators, different types of stoves, tables, things like that, right. Some maybe changes in the spatial location, but like if we start taking out the stove in the refrigerator, we may no longer refer to that room as a kitchen, right. 

So the idea here is that if we have too fundamental of a change in the core, then maybe again that changes the ideology completely. Okay. So different members of the same ideology families, what does that mean? Right. So the basic idea here is that like if we take, let's say liberalism as a political ideology, right, is that if we compare the views of different liberal thinkers, okay, the way they may sort of articulate and think about liberalism may not be completely identical. 

Okay. But we would still all refer to them as liberals. Do you see what I'm saying? So the idea here is again, we can have, we want to allow for some sort of like variation for different thinkers working within the same intellectual tradition. Can you give me an example? 

Yeah. So like an example is if we took maybe someone like, so the example of that freedom will use as a sort of a prototype and paradigm for thinking about liberalism is the philosopher John Stuart Mill. He'll take his views as a sort of basis for thinking about liberalism. 

So the idea is, okay, John Stuart Mill is a liberal philosopher. Okay. But now you may have, let's say, another liberal philosopher, maybe someone like John Rawls. 

Okay. John Rawls, his views may not be completely identical to John Stuart Mill. But we would still both refer to them as liberals. 

And so that's the idea here is that you could, you'll have enough similarity, enough family resemblance to include them within the camp of liberalism, even though their views may not be identical in every single respect. Gotcha. Okay. 

Thank you. Okay. So that's the core concepts. Okay. The next are the adjacent concepts. Okay. The adjacent concepts are those concepts that are secondary in importance. Okay. 

So they're again, not as fundamental to understanding the ideology as the core concepts are. Okay. That's good. And again, these adjacent concepts should not, again, be confused right with the quasi-contingent categories that are defining the ICs of a particular concept. Here we're again talking about concepts in the second layer here. And then the last layer are the peripheral concepts. 

This has two different categories here. The first category are what you refer to as marginal concepts. These are just concepts that have much more diminished importance within a political ideology. So again, one thing we'll see within the history of liberalism, the concept of property tends to move from a core concept out to a peripheral concept. 

The fact that that concept undergoes that transition signifies that property becomes less and less of importance within liberalism. Why does that matter? Why does that happen? Well, it's perhaps because liberals become, let's say, more concerned about the distribution of income and wealth. And rectifying, addressing those issues often means interfering with property, limiting property rights. So for these reasons, we see the concept of property move from a core concept out to the peripheral here. Whereas again, from a libertarian perspective, what we'll see is that the concept of property is within the core here. So that means property rights are much more important within libertarianism than liberalism. 

Which again, because of that, that means you can't interfere with individuals' property rights, which will then have all sorts of other implications for the distribution of income and wealth, these things. So again, that's the first sort of a type here. Then the other type is what we call perimeter concepts. These perimeter concepts are not of diminished importance, they just refer to specific policy proposals. 

So these perimeter concepts are examples like, let's say, a political ideology supports something like a fair wage, or a minimum wage, or universal health care. These policy proposals are then included within this area here. So it's again, because these policy proposals that are included within this outer bound here, that we'll see, especially in the case of liberalism and socialism, but this also makes come up in the case of libertarianism and conservatism as well. In some of these cases, these ideologies may share these outer bounds here. 

There may be some overlap here, right? So it may be the case, for instance, that liberalism and socialism both support something like universal health care, or minimum wage. That means, again, they line up on these specific policy proposals, right? But again, the important thing is here, what we'll be able to see is that even though they line up on these specific policy proposals, because their cores and adjacencies are different, they have different routes, different roads to those policy proposals. So that means they have different arguments and justifications for those policy proposals. And that's helpful too, because the idea here is just because we see, I don't know, politicians supporting a specific policy proposal, like universal health care, we can't necessarily just conclude their ideological commitments from those policy proposals. We have to look at what are the arguments, the justifications for those. So we see this as a sort of potential, I say, issue in the case of liberalism and socialism, but it's something that also potentially comes up when we'll be discussing libertarianism and conservatism, because they may also share specific policy proposals here, but we'll see again that the core adjacencies are going to be so very different. And so that's something we want to be sensitive to. 

Benita? I have a question about how the adjacent concepts shouldn't be confused with closets in the same category, or closets in the different adjacencies. What's the difference? So essentially the main difference here is that the adjacent concepts will not be necessary to interpreting the ICs of those other political concepts. That's the first difference. 

And then again the second difference is that again they'll have a lower level of importance. Yvan? Similar question. What's the difference between an adjacent concept and a marginal concept? And a marginal concept. So essentially adjacent concepts have a slightly higher degree of importance within the ideology. But that's sort of just subjective to what the different... Yeah, yeah. And we'll see. I mean one thing to keep in mind too here is like as we go through, we'll want to see right if we agree with like three things in terms of where do I sort of look. Okay. 

Speaker 1: and the community is that it makes the state, the concept of the state, play a more sort of important role within the state. Okay, and so this is why we see the state forming one of these sort of adjacent concepts. 

Within, again, its morphology here. Because what we're going to see right is that from the literal perspective, this idea of non-constraint, because it's connected to individuality, that is the development of our rational capacities, this idea of constraint becomes expanded, to refer to, again, various social and economic constraints as well. Okay, and so again, this means because of this connection here, what this is going to lead is to a sort of a service understanding of the state. So what I mean by that, the idea here is that under the liberal view, the state is seen as a service to citizens, or it provides services to citizens. And those services are going to ultimately be interpreted connected to the development of our rational capacities here. So in this way, what we see here, right, the way to think about this is the commitment to the development, or let's say just self development, is going to lead to a more expansive understanding of the state. Okay, so the state is going to play a more sort of active role in society given that connection to self development, okay, because liberals, and we'll see with socialists too, is that they'll see the state as one of the prime vehicles, right, by which again, we can sort of address these obstacles to self development. Okay, so in this way, again, the idea here, right, is that the state has an obligation to create the sort of conditions necessary or conducive that's going to lead to individuals self development. Okay, so again, this ultimately leads again to a more sort of active role for the state in society, in the economy, okay. And again, it's a commitment to again, that idea of self development that ultimately leads to that. And so I think again, just the key thing to understand here, right, it's that conceptual commitment to self development that leads again to this more expansive understanding of the role of the state in society. 

And again, the other thing too, remember though, that even though the goal here, right, is always self development, the commitment to freedom from the liberal perspective means again that we can never sort of compel individuals, coerce individuals to again engage in self development, to use their freedom, right, to pursue their true self, so to speak. So within the state, like we are arguing, so we kind of get that 

Speaker 2: anyway as an option, that makes sense, or is that right? 

Speaker 1: So you said we get that as an option, what's that that word for? We don't, like we have options to build up for states, if we get every season, but not the most. Correct, yeah, right, hopefully. 

Speaker 3: Could you clarify the second bullet point a little bit, like about, so is that saying basically that the state is kind of in a sense restricting non-constraints? 

Speaker 1: No, so yeah, I guess we'll think about it this way, so if the IC, right, it's recognizing more potential constraints to freedom and yes, self development, yeah, yeah. So when we say individuals should not be constrained, that means we're removing some of those constraints in obstacle time, yeah. 

Okay, so again, the idea here is the commitment to those sorts of concepts here, right? Freedom interpreted as self development, right, with this connection to the common good here, this again leads to a more active role for the state, and what we want to see from the liberal perspective is this will lead to specific policies, okay, to the support of specific policies from a liberal perspective. The other important thing here too is that, keep in mind the sort of historical context in which again, liberalism and new liberalism were developing, okay, so we're talking about here, again, let's say from the 1850s, okay, onwards, right? So here we're talking about, again, when thinkers were becoming more and more aware of the effects of industrialization, okay, on the quality of the lives of workers, okay, so this also led to more sort of concern here about again, these sort of working conditions, right, because again, the idea here is right, again, if we want individuals to be able to develop their rational capacities, then if they're spending, again, 16, 18 hours a day working, right, in very shitty conditions, that's not going to be very conducive to that, okay, so again, they were becoming more and more aware of these sort of inimical effects, right, that industrialization was having on the quality of lives of workers, okay, so this also means that they were expressing significant concern towards how we can sort of improve the quality of work, okay, for workers, okay, and we see this again also in the United States, so what's referred to as the sort of progressive era in the United States, so approximately at those dates there, we see again, a sort of early emphasis on very specific interpretations of economic freedom, so again, the ability for workers to unionize here, the trying to push for more, again, improvements in both wages, but also working conditions, okay, again, a lot of these sorts of things, democracy in the workplace, so having more control over your working conditions, okay, all of these were important concerns we'll see for both liberals and socialists, okay, and again, the idea here is that also it leads to, again, we'll see more regulations of corporations, okay, and trying to impose regulations on, again, health and safety conditions for workers, okay, because again, think about it this way, right, again, if our goal is the development of our rational capacities, we spend a lot of time working, then that requires us, right, to be more conscious of the conditions in which workers are spending the vast majority of their lives, is that again conducive to self-development or not? So how would something like prohibition be into this, because that seems to me like you're taking away a freedom, but at the same time you could argue that it's for your own self-development. 

Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting, especially in the case of someone like Th Green, so there are, it's interesting because you could give an argument, right, for it and an argument against it, and that's the sort of tricky thing about it, and that's what, again, I think others are sort of concerned is that once you get this commitment to positive freedom, it sort of opens the door to these sorts of things, right? 

So that's, yeah, the tricky sort of thing. You can give arguments for and against those sorts of things. All I'll say is it depends on the liberal thinker, in that sense, yeah. Okay, so I wanna just give another sort of a concrete example of which we may see, again, a sort of, again, policy, the way that sort of policy reflects a, the conceptual commitment to these various sorts of concepts, okay? And I think a good example of this in the history of the United States is, again, something like Roosevelt's, again, New Deal. Okay, so here are just, again, a couple of the different examples of the different policies implemented with the New Deal, okay? So something like the Social Security Act, okay? 

Implemented in 1935, okay? So this gives, again, people unemployment insurance, old age pensions, age to the disabled, and dependent children, okay? Something then, again, like public works program, again, giving people the opportunity to find employment, okay? The Wagner Act, so again, this allowed workers to unionize, okay? This was, unionization plays a fundamental role here in improving the conditions for workers. 

The Wealth Tax Act, so again, in 1935, for anybody who made over $5 million, they were taxed 79% on that income. So very different compared to today. Okay, so. And then, again, the Fair Standards Labor Act, so again, and I think we can see this, the Fair Standards Labor Act, a sort of direct consequence of something like, again, the Wagner Act here, because, again, if workers have the ability to unionize historically, that has led to the push to improve working conditions for workers, okay? So, again, things like an implementation of a minimum wage, 40-hour work weeks, okay? Again, eight-hour workdays, all of these sorts of things. 

Oh, wow. So again, I think we can see this, or interpret the new deal as an implementation of a commitment to these sorts of liberal ideals that we've been discussing, even. 

Speaker 4: How would you look at a policy like this and connect it to liberalism immediately without it just being some correlation but not necessarily a direct inspiration behind it? 

Speaker 1: Well, so I guess we would just have to, again, look at these sort of justifications, the arguments offered, yeah, for these sorts of things. And I mean, another sort of thing to those, what we would see is, again, many of these sorts of things, I think, from excluding socialism, so socialists would agree to many of these sorts of things, and that actually introduces a complexity that when we get to socialism, we'll have to discuss, is that F.E .R. wanted to sort of incorporate socialist support, okay, and so that's, again, part of the justification for this. And socialists, we'll discuss this in more detail when we get to socialism, but socialism, historically, as a political ideology, has faced a sort of catch-22, and the catch-22 is the following, that, okay, on the one hand, they want to get rid of capitalism, okay, that's the long-term goal, right? 

But in order to do that, you need to make sure that capitalism is really shitty, okay? But that means, right, that the current generation of workers has to suffer in order for capitalism to get really bad, to create that sort of incentive, right, to make the transition to socialism. But then, on the other hand, socialists were pushed to say, okay, well, look, maybe we should try to implement, right, some short-term piecemeal reforms to improve the quality of the lives of workers now, okay? The irony of that, though, is what we'll see is that from a socialist perspective, when you implement these small reforms to capitalism, you actually make capitalism more bearable for the workers, and in doing so, you undermine the impetus and incentive to revolt against capitalism as an economic system. So that was a sort of catch-22 that socialists had to grapple with, and that's one reason why FVR implemented something like this to be able to sort of combine together that socialist support, and socialists had to decide did we want to give Roosevelt support here, should we resist these sorts of things, okay? So that's sort of one thing to keep in mind. The other thing, Ethan, is that what we'll see is that the theoretical commitments for all of the other ideologies, again, classical liberalism, libertarianism, and conservatism, their theoretical commitments would lead to the rejection of many of these sorts of policies. 

Speaker 5: Colin and then Boeb. Yeah, so couldn't it be argued that it's not like the Well-Tax Act would de-incentivize self-development? 

Speaker 1: The incentive, in what way? 

Speaker 5: Well, especially in regards to treating corporations as people, if you make the concept that the more you gain, the more it's taken away, theoretically, de-incentivize, gain more, and develop more. 

Speaker 1: Right, so good question, what do you all think? Essentially, another way of putting the question right is do you think, again, if you push the tax rates too high, you're going to de-incentivize people from working more? 

Speaker 6: We need some? I was thinking about too about how the 79% only allowed them to keep 21% of their income. What kind of, maybe, hindered their self-development, but I guess it could also make the argument that by taking that much money from their income, you're helping the common good by using that money there. But I guess that kind of goes against their idea that you need individuals to pursue their self-development in order to have the common good. This kind of just seems like it's jumping a step. Okay, okay, good. What do others think, Jake and James? 

Speaker 7: I think it's self-development is necessarily tied to monetary success, and while there is probably a correlation between self-developed individuals and monetary gains, it isn't like, I think in our culture perception, now the most developed is the person who wins the most money, gains the most money. But I think from my understanding of mill and green definitions, more kind of increased rationality, and a person can become far more rational without accumulating vast quantities of wealth. And so I think we approach it from the rationality side. 

There's no reason to be de-incentivized by high income earners being taxed highly because there isn't a correlation between development and wages. Okay, good. James and then Poland and then Alex. 

Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna say the exact same thing. I guess the only addition would be that's kind of hard to point out, like if we're saying corporations are people, we kind of can't put that same lens in a corporation, but I think that's just why we shouldn't think of corporations as people. No problem. Colin, do you want to respond? Yeah, sure. I think like to a certain extent, we can't really separate mill and greens integration of wealth because of wealth wasn't an issue and there wouldn't be any 

Speaker 5: taxes because why does anybody need money? Obviously there's like a difference between like mass quantities of wealth and then playing with it was at the tip of the toe. That's good, yeah. 

Speaker 1: More argument the better, so. 

Speaker 8: I mean, I feel like if to be more developed, it means to have more money than why isn't wealth like a core concept. So I feel like that kind of eliminates the power of self development. 

Speaker 1: Oh, well, what about then our Jake's point about maybe, again, that maybe some wealth is necessary, but again, it doesn't have to be completely defined just in those terms. 

Speaker 9: Yeah. Oh, gosh. 

Speaker 1: What about again, other just the sort of general question here we could sort of abstract that away from self development for a moment. Do you think again, sort of higher tax rates ends up again, sort of de-incentivizing people from working? Okay. 

Speaker 10: I feel like the wealth tax act, for example, it seems to be like various socialist leaning policies since it's kind of against wealth accumulation, it's kind of against capitalism. So I feel like it's not necessarily against for lower income households to work for their life savings, but it's kind of against capitalism, that's general. It's like if you accumulate too much wealth, might kind of like damage the interests of other people in some ways. And yeah, I don't think it's necessarily against the, like further like the normal households to accumulate. Oh, wow. 

Speaker 1: All right, so there's a lot of other hands. Bo, I know you had your hand up earlier, but was it related to this or? 

Speaker 11: It actually was. Oh, okay. The wealth tax act, we've gotten self-development more like a freedom respect, that was saying like the wagraff makes sense, because that goes into the quality and freedom. Right. The wealth tax act kind of goes against the not constrained aspect. Right, right. It's literally restraining individuals at a certain point. 

Speaker 1: So is that, is your point though, it's constraining the higher wealth earners? Yeah, my point is that the wealth tax act is not a liberal view because it's totally goes against individuality and freedom. Okay, okay, good. Oh, I see. All right, so yeah, how do others feel about that? Or there were just previous hands up? Ethan, did you want to respond to that? Or was it something earlier? 

Speaker 4: Yeah, it was about like the more general, like whether or not such a high wealth tax would be a non-construed or like a constraint against self-development. I feel like obviously a 79% income tax is kind of absurd, but it's kind of the difference between having $5 million and having like, I don't know, it's like 21% of 5 million is, but 

Speaker 9: it's still like, do you either want to be really rich or like kind of rich? I don't think it's gonna be, I think the people who are making $5 million anyways are still gonna be making a lot of money. Like they're not just gonna go like, I guess I don't want to be rich. Right, right. 

Speaker 1: And yeah, so that's the thing I was wondering about. Again, so like again, if someone makes the argument right, that Bo is making that it may sort of, again, sort of violate individual freedom here or de-incentivize that, right? Again, I mean, what about this sort of rejoinder that look, I mean, these people are still going to be making a ton of money here. I mean, this was $5 million in 1935. I mean, even $5 million now would still be a lot of money, I mean, so the question is again, would you sort of stop working to make that $2 million, whatever, right? Just because you knew if you made the $5 million, it was gonna get taxed that much. Seth and then Kale. 

Speaker 12: Yeah, I think that like, the 7% is interesting. I think that like for most wealthy people, it's like, it's about the deal. So essentially, if I'm paying 79% in income tax, then like, you know, where's like the inquital amount of social benefits I get, right? And so like, I think for historically speaking, you know, that kind of like, high wealth status people, their money's very liquid. So like, they can move to other places and not have to pay that. 

And especially now more than ever, I think in 1935, we was in Lesto, now it's really, really easy to create show corporations. There's a lot of other nations that can provide that. So like, the deal has to be solid for, you know, if you're paying 79%, the deal has to be solid for you. And even with that, even with that, like for, you know, kind of like skin and everything, like why aren't, you know, why is right now the US like 50% of the global stock market, right? Like in terms of like company value, in terms of like, so you think about it from that perspective, even with the kind of like more Scandinavian model, which is kind of like higher income tax, maybe better deal, you know, you could like question and I'd be like, okay, that's great, but ultimately speaking, you know, like the entire US can kind of make more money in than that could potentially you know, raise the floor, but there's questions there. 

Speaker 1: So yeah. To answer your question of whether this would disincentivize people from working, I think that it might disincentivize the general public because we see at least in America today, like a lot of people being upset over like high taxes on the rich, despite the fact that most people are never gonna make that amount of money. And I think it's because the American dream makes people think that they can get up to that point when realistically, almost nobody can make it up to that point. So I think that it would disincentivize people despite the fact that they will never reach that level of definitely speaking. Right, right. 

Speaker 1: It is interesting, I can't remember, I had to remember that some economists had done studies about this and I mean, again, I may be misremembering this, but I do remember they said somewhere around like a 70% is where it starts to have a sort of negative effect on incentives for workers. So that could still be again, potentially, though much higher right then what sort of being taxed now or there is so James, Jay, and Colin. 

Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. If the argument is that income tax this high is gonna disincentivize, then you could work that argument all the way down to a 1% income tax and then disincentivize. So if we can find a threshold of 70%, yeah, maybe the extra 9% might be a little too far. But okay, I'll take 70% over what we have now, what 21% not even. As for what Seth is saying about GDP, I don't think GDP is a good, I'd like, not something good to look at, especially if all of our GDP is concentrated in the top 22% of what we have here. I don't think a higher GDP really correlates with a higher economy good, like they would think would be a argue. Oh wow, like Jay, and Colin. 

Speaker 7: I was gonna make a similar point that I think that I agree that the deal, I think that the deal is a good point that Seth made that it has to be has to be someone sensitive to seeing where their money is going, where this 79% of their money is it, giving them better education, giving them better health care, it's giving them better roads, a structure and all of that. 

If that is coming out and that's there, there's reason to stay. And I think that can be pretty clearly seen in Scandinavian countries where people are paying very high tax but getting really good benefits. And Sicily and right now, the happiest people in the world as well, where they have health care, they have great infrastructure, great education. And so while they may not be producing as much as the US, I think at least by level definition, like Jay was saying, of the common good, there seems to be a higher common good there. And that would be in favor of, they got 79%, but at least higher taxes. 

Oh, Coleman. Yeah, I don't know, I'm certainly no expert on how government runs and how much money is actually given, I mean, even here in mass, working with a normal job, I got 30% taxes, like every paycheck, which is just so ridiculous. And then I don't know, in terms of perspective, there's always someone doing better than you that you want from, I don't know. I mean, the same way that I think we get upset at the wealthy are getting tax more. 

Speaker 5: No, we get upset at the wealthy are not being tax more. People, there's always going to be lower than you, once more, I don't know. I don't see, I think taxes, it was too much. That's my final point, I don't like taxes. 

Speaker 14: I just looked up the wealth tax of 1935, and they said it was not successful because a lot of wealthy people use loopholes in the tax codes to evade taxes. 

Speaker 15: And that leads to another tax in 1937 and 1942, a new policy. Because I feel like 29% is too much of an extreme that whether it's actually ensuring equality or not, it's a question mark. 

Speaker 1: I'm starting in the game. So going off your point, when we talked about the rule of the state, making the connection between self-development and the community, when 

Speaker 10: she's talking about how high wealth individuals know, free of the rules and all that stuff, I feel like that kind of splinters the whole idea of creating the community. Right, right. 

So I was just really wondering, when it came to creating this thing, was it a goal to just fairness, fairness, fairness, or is it part of like, hey, let's really focus on the whole community and self-development? 

Speaker 1: Like, right, right. Yeah, that's a good question. And again, it's a sort of very specific way of interpreting the sort of community, right? Because your comments here just sort of remind me of another point, right? What we're gonna see when we get to conservatism, right? Is that the idea of the community plays a very sort of fundamental role there as well, right? And it's interesting because I think most of the time, when we think of liberalism, we don't necessarily think of the community or the common good playing a very important role. We'll see that when we get to classical liberalism, it doesn't, but with liberalism here, it does seem to play right a more important role. So I think another thing of like, we should keep in mind here, right, is how again sort of is the community, the common good, being sort of interpreted in sort of liberal terms here. And then keep that in mind and compare it to sort of how conservatism is sort of interpreting that concept. Because again, it may be very different there, right? And so we may see a sort of like different emphasis on different aspects of those sorts of concepts there. 

Speaker 2: Yeah, I think going off what you were saying, Cole, and I'm like, high taxes are, they feel bad. I think they feel bad when we don't see anything happening as a result of them. We have a tax on 30%, but the trains still run on time. 

There's still potholes, there's still bad things happening. I think you could have a tax of 79% if you could see the result of that tax. You can actually see, okay, like you were saying, except for like a deal that you had of, I'm paying this money to kind of work towards the common good. Whereas right now it just seems like I'm paying this money and I'm not being like that. 

Speaker 1: What if though the very wealthy say that, for them, they're never gonna see the benefits of it because they can already afford all of the really nice private healthcare, the really nice private education, these sorts of things. So what if they say for them, there's never going to be any sort of benefit to Sweden to deal, so to speak. 

Speaker 6: Really good, kind of opposite of the other way around, even like the most, even today, people who are out of poverty line, oh, I don't want to pay to talk to them, but for someone who doesn't have taxes, I'm not sure whatever, because if I win the lottery or something, I'm gonna end up paying those taxes. So I feel like it's the opposite, they see it as such a thing, but maybe it could be possible one day, but they don't think it's the same way around where rich people are like, oh, I'm gonna end up somehow, right there. So I don't know if they really see it, like I even know that is a possibility. It's interesting, like the optimism versus the pessimism on both sides. 

Speaker 9: Their taxes would still go to like fundamental things, like you said, like potholes and highways and things like that, like keeping, like just government agencies, I feel like they would use that. Like they might not benefit from like free healthcare, for example, but they would still benefit from other things, like things in their daily life that they don't think about, that their taxes would contribute to. 

Speaker 16: I think the only thing is that like, they're gonna, even if they like, like opt out of getting like the private healthcare costs and they do see the benefits, like I guess my thing is they would still know they're paying more than everyone else for the same benefits and even like more on top of that, they don't even like need them per cent. They could just go and get their own. So I don't know if that really even like, would sweeten the deal. 

Speaker 1: It may come down to just what's in self-interest, right? And so that may also be a question of what sort of like human nature like. And so that's something we'll come back to, James. 

Speaker 2: Yeah, you see a lot of wealthy people against salt taxes, against state and local taxes. And I understand the argument, but I guess for one, you could say that nobody gets that, of the wealth without exploitation of the workers. So okay, maybe you guys can keep your mind, but let's set up a system that from now on, nobody gets to that level of wealth. So, we're not a problem anymore. 

Speaker 1: Right, another sort of a potential argument that maybe like the liberal or the socialist would get, or let's say the liberal instead of the socialist might go to the exploitation route, the liberal might just say, look, even to get to these high levels of wealth, you're only able to do so by benefits made by society, so that is you are benefiting from the common good, from the state, right? And it's only because of those benefits, those contributions made by society that you've been able to reach this point of wealth. 

And so perhaps that creates a sort of like reciprocal obligation, right? I mean, even if you take someone like Elon Musk, for example, like his Tesla and Space Force, right? I mean, both of these companies have received billions of dollars in government subsidies. That's taxpayers contributing, giving subsidies to those companies, right? So again, maybe from the liberal perspective, that just highlights again the sort of reciprocal relationship here between the individual and the common good. So that's another potential way to think about it. Pauline, Ethan, and then Yasmin. 

Speaker 5: Yeah, I agree with James in terms of, I don't think that exorbitant amount of wealth is good. I guess it's kind of hard to draw that line is, it's like as low as a million dollars, I don't know. But I feel like in terms of government spending, it's like how much do we need to fix potholes? 

You know what I mean? All of this money, where is it going? And I feel like in terms of the common good and the liberalism, it's like the common good, like for who, how big does that line go? Does the US just spend so much money and like for an aid for people that we don't really know I mean, isn't the common good of everybody on the earth? The only people who don't agree with us, who hate us at all, I know. Right, yeah. 

Speaker 1: It is interesting too, I think we also do have a tendency to sort of underestimate even just how much a million dollars is, especially when we talk about the salaries of athletes and stuff, we're making 30, 40, 50 million a year. And like, you know, one million, let's say you're working an average job making about 50,000 a year, do you know how long you have to work for to make one million dollars? Too long. 30 years. So you have to work 30 years at a $50,000 a year job to make that one million. Ethan and then Yasmin. 

Speaker 4: I just had a question. So you said that like a liberal might argue that, you know, one can only get to this level of wealth by benefiting from society. And there's sort of like a reciprocal obligation, but does that mean that society can compel someone to reciprocate this sort of re-education? 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so I think that's a good question there. And I think again, maybe we could say potentially, right? So again, if we think of taxes as something like that, that could be the sort of argument there, right? But then that comes back to Beau's point, is that again, that seems like it's again, potentially interfering right with individual freedom, right? Again, if we see taxes like that, just as a sort of interference with individual freedom, then again, the question is, can it be sort of justified? So like we'll see, especially something like libertarianism, for example, it'll take that line that you can't tax people, you can't, because it's a violation of individual freedom. So Yasmin. Yeah, I do want to make it 

Speaker 3: a bit more just to say to society that we'll come back here, because as you 

Speaker 6: mentioned that usually, for a lot of people, they're not just a product of like an enormous concentration of resources, and like in the different cases of like, there's also like a lot of great timing and luck like that a lot of them for doing this well is of course, you know, a lot of books that people don't see it that way, that they see themselves, and again, this is where they kind of like a little bit of an individual that's back in that sort of, if I'm just going to say this, it's really my own. Hard work, no responsibility, yeah. Yeah, yeah, and now, I'm thinking about the way this is very hard to do, like of course these people were able to benefit, and this is true, but how do you create this focus of where those people want to invest? Yeah, I think this is a lot of others too. 

Speaker 1: Right, yeah, and again, I think that's a good point too, because that's going to be another sort of difference we'll see between like liberalism, classical liberalism and conservatism. Classical liberalism, again, we'll see that it sort of interprets sort of a social economic outcomes as a product of individualism, hard work, responsibility, these sorts of things, so that's another sort of thing to keep in mind there. 

Okay, let me move on with this a bit, and then so I want to make sure we at least get started with a classical liberalism today. So the things that take away from this, is further implications of this is that the concept of property moves to the perimeter of liberalism, okay? So this means the concept of property here, again becomes a sort of one of very sort of like diminished importance from the liberal perspective, because again, the idea here is that we need to interfere with breakup concentrations, wealth, property, that may also again mean, notice here again, this comes back to the sort of tension between freedom and like the common good, but it also may mean interfering with freedoms concerning uses of property, right? Again, if you implement something like an inheritance tax, right, that again is a potential way of limiting individualism, freedom about what they want to do with their wealth, with their property there, okay? Another important implication here of moving property further out of the core here, away from the core, is that someone like Green did not view a freedom of contract as an exercise of individual freedom at all. 

Speaker 13: So this is I think a very important point, this is going to be another huge cleavage point between liberalism and something like classical liberalism and libertarianism. How do you all feel about this point? So the ability for an employee to negotiate the terms of their employment with their employer. 

Speaker 1: Liberals and we'll see socialists did not see this as an exercise of individual freedom at all. 

Speaker 2: James? So I understand the socialist perspective of like there's a power dynamic and there's a balance. What with the liberal, would it be the same argument? Yeah, it's gonna be the same, yeah, the same argument there. Yeah, yeah, I can see the value of that argument. It just leads to, yeah, some sort of, yeah. 

Speaker 1: No problem, okay. 

Speaker 12: Wait, I'm kinda confused about a liberal argument. 

Speaker 1: It's just, so the idea here is ultimately right, is that if you take let's say just one employee, right, and they're going to negotiate terms of their contract, the idea here is that they're working from completely different areas of power, right? So the worker, the employee, is in a vulnerable position compared to the employer, okay? So that's what I mean here by inequalities in bargaining, right, and so because of that, they're going to, if you just allow them to exercise their freedom and negotiate the terms of the contract, you're always going to end up with terms that are going to benefit the employer at the cost of the employee, given their vulnerability. 

Speaker 12: Okay, well I don't really agree with that, but I think that it depends on the market. So for example, I don't know, right now, if you are an AI PhD and you go to your employer, that employer does not have a lot of power. 

If you wanna leave and go get a pay raise, there's gonna be other companies that are gonna give you that pay raise, and so I think it depends on, yeah, it depends on the market, it depends on the market dynamics. 

Speaker 1: So you think it's not worthy though that you used in PhD and AI to make your argument in that exam? 

Speaker 12: Oh yeah, exactly, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's a really big deal, yeah. 

Speaker 1: So I guess the question though then is to what extent can you sort of extrapolate that logic to the vast majority of the working force? 

Speaker 12: But I just think that it's gonna be hard to generalize. I think that statement is just a hard statement to make, because it's just, yeah, it's hard to generalize that kind of thing. Like it could be an inequality to the employer, could be to the employee, could be power to the employee. I think probably at this time, yeah, you could argue the majority of employers have power in the negotiation, but even with that, depends on the country, it depends on the sector, just depends on the market that you're in. So yeah, I don't know, I feel like it lacks nuance. 

Speaker 1: So again, one of the, this leads again to the sort of justification, right, for again, different sets of economic freedoms, like again, the ability for workers to unionize. Because being able to unionize is a way of sort of giving, getting rid of these inequalities in the bargaining situation between the employers and the employees, no problem. 

Speaker 15: Wendy? And I believe there's an idea of how freedom contracts, and it's employed, like even before like, like it's like started at 1905, like when there's someone who got fined for breaking a state law that went into the number of hours that his employees could work. 

Speaker 1: You're probably talking about the law and the Supreme Court, and people come back to the later area. 

Speaker 15: Yeah, so I believe that as long as there's legal protection that's continuously enforced by the state, it won't be like that big of a problem because freedom doesn't mean that you could not have a contract with someone, it means you can choose who to contract with, whether, how you contract with, and how, what terms, and people can enter and negotiate with those terms. So yeah, that's just... All right, James. Yeah, I don't think the solution to this is 

Speaker 2: you can never have a contract with your employer. It's just you can't sign a contract that requires you to work 12 hours a day, seven days a week. There have to be some sort of, yeah, limits on the contract, no contract ever. 

Speaker 1: Right. Okay, so what all of this means in summary for our purposes at this point, again, like I said, again, property once it moves out or further away from the liberal core, again, what that means is that from the liberal perspective, that would justify or make permissible more interferences with property rights of individuals. And again, primarily what we would be talking about here are the, again, property rights of corporations, very wealthy individuals. 

It comes somewhat, again, has similar connections. Think back to one of our very first lectures with Marx, right, how essentially we're talking about like the property rights of the capitalist here, right? Those individuals who own the means of production. In this way, again, I think, especially on this second bullet point here, again, if we think of property rights as being conventional rather than natural rights, so natural rights would mean property rights exist outside of the state, right? They're defined outside of the state. 

But if we think of them as being conventional as being rights defined by the state, then that means we could define property rights in a way to make them conducive, right, to other conceptual theoretical goals that we may have. Okay. So in this case, again, self-development, right? Individuality, these sorts of things. 

Oh, wow. Okay, so in summary, what we should take away from all of this, from our discussion of liberalism here, is what we see is that the movement of the state into the adjacency within liberal morphology, this has the consequence of bringing liberalism and socialism together as political ideology. So I think, right, it was David, you who had mentioned, who you felt, right, some of those policies were socialist policies, okay? So again, even I think right nowadays, we see, again, a lot of these policies, something like universal healthcare being described as socialist policies. 

Historically, again, they were not just seen as socialist policies, right? Again, and I think a key, perhaps a key way of sort of differentiating this, is because remember, liberalism, the sort of middle-life, new liberalism, these thinkers were always committed to capitalism, okay? They did not want to get rid of capitalism, they just wanted to reform it to make it more conducive to self-development, right? So this means implementing more sorts of regulations on capitalism, okay? So one way of sort of understanding something like FDR's New Deal is, again, are these sort of fundamental changes to capitalism? Are they trying to change the economic system, right? 

Or just trying to add regulation within that system, okay? And then again, we'll see why, again, socialism, I had mentioned previously, right, was stuck between this sort of catch-22 situation, right? Why socialists might have supported these sorts of reforms of capitalism that were not necessarily trying to overturn the capitalist system, okay? Again, this means though, we'll see that the perimeters of liberalism and socialism may have these similarities, right, they may support similar policy proposals. But what we see is maybe their sort of justifications may be potentially different, maybe they're similar. That's one thing we'll have to look at when we get to socialism. 

However, the other sort of implication here is that it also creates further distance between liberalism and these other political ideologies. Okay. All right, so, give everyone a minute more to write that down. And then what we'll do, we'll use that as a segue to turn to our next political ideology, which will be classical liberalism. Okay, so let's go ahead and turn to classical liberalism. Now, when we start with classical liberalism, there's one important sort of clarification I need to make about the terminology here. 

So maybe you noticed in the readings for today, right? Freedom refers to it as libertarianism, okay? So what I'm gonna do here for our purposes is draw a distinction because I think especially nowadays, libertarianism refers again to something a bit different, right, than what Frieden is here referring to. So, Frieden in the book, when he describes libertarianism, he's referring to classical liberalism, okay? So the sort of general key features of classical liberalism are going to be the following. What we're going to see is that classical liberal thinkers tend to emphasize this sort of commitment to economic liberalism. So what I mean by economic liberalism is essentially a lot of freedom in the marketplace, okay? 

So less regulations, these sorts of things, and they tend to wed that sort of commitment with a commitment to a utilitarian, consequentialist moral philosophy. So essentially for our purposes here, utilitarianism is a moral philosophy that again says the morally right action is the one that produces the greatest amount of good for the greatest number of people, okay? For our purposes here, utilitarianism is a very sort of consequentialist moral theory. What I mean by that is that it's very focused on the consequences, the outcomes, okay? 

So what we see again with a lot of classical liberal thinkers is that we're going to see a connection here where they emphasize a very specific definition of our interpretation of individual freedom, and they justify that on the basis that it often leads to the best consequences. Okay. And so that's where we see the sort of utilitarianism coming to you. 

Okay. So then again, the idea here, right, is that what freedom refers into the book as libertarianism again, it's now referred to as classical liberalism or old liberalism. And again, an important point here is historically, again, the view we're going to cover was developed before liberalism and the new liberalism. 

That's why it's referred to as classical liberalism and old liberalism, okay? Again, it's often associated initially with thinkers like maybe John Wauk, then Adam Smith, okay? Various political economists like David Ricardo, John Stuart Mill's father, James Mill, so thinkers like this, okay? And again, maybe some, again, utilitarian thinkers like Jeremy Bentham, so these are sort of the original classical liberals. Nowadays, it would be more associated with thinkers like economists like Milton Friedman, Friedrich Hayek, individuals like that. 

Okay. Now the interesting thing about this is especially classical liberals in the last century, they would view themselves as being sort of more representative of liberalism because they think they ultimately have a better sort of commitment to individual freedom than liberalism does. And this partly comes about maybe because again, you all have been focusing on the tension, right, between freedom and the common good within liberalism. We'll see primarily for that same reason classical liberals view themselves as being sort of contemporary classical liberals as being, again, more true to the sort of liberal tradition because they tend to sort of minimize, get rid of that sort of tension altogether and we'll see how. So then we have what's also referred to as contemporary versions of libertarianism and this we'll cover in the next few classes, but this is going to be different than classical liberals and should not be confused with classical liberalism. So we might say in some sense, we'll see that contemporary versions of a classical liberalism will tend to push some of the conclusions in classical liberalism, perhaps the more sort of extreme conclusions. 

Okay. And this is because one of the important differences we'll see between a classical liberalism and at least many of the more popular versions of contemporary liberalism is that the arguments are much less based in utilitarian considerations. They don't rely on the outcomes, the consequences, economic efficiency, these sorts of things where these sorts of ideas, again, all play an important role in classical liberalism. So a lot of contemporary versions of libertarianism, so one of the most famous contemporary versions of libertarianism, someone like Robert Nozick, he was not a fan of utilitarianism at all and he was a contient. 

So he followed a completely different moral theory that sort of rejected this entire emphasis on the outcomes and consequences. Okay. What we'll see though is that both classical liberalism and libertarianism may have some potential similarities with conservatism. Okay. And we'll have to see in what ways later on. But are there just any initial questions regarding this sort of distinction here between classical liberals and libertarians? 

Speaker 7: I'm curious, where would like a neoliberal fall on there? 

Speaker 1: What we're going to see is the neoliberals would fall under the classical liberal. Oh, yeah. Okay, so here is the core of classical liberalism. Freedom, individuality, human nature, property and power, and here are the adjacent concepts. So with an initial look at this, does anything stand out to you? Any differences with liberalism? 

David? Like human nature and core concepts? Yeah, I mean, technically a liberalism does have human nature or rationality as a core concept. What we're going to see with these ones though, it's going to be very different interpretations. Okay. So again, this important thing to notice here, right? This goes back to something we discussed at the very beginning. Classical liberalism may actually share a commitment to the same concepts, but what we're going to see is that it's going to have very different interpretations of these concepts. Okay. 

Speaker 2: James? Property and the core concept is definitely different. Right. Evolutionary theory and the adjacent concept. Right. What, how did they, is this like the 1700s? Approximately, yeah. So did they still have an evolutionary, because evolution itself hasn't been developed yet. So how did they see that? 

Speaker 1: It's going to depend, so there's going to be some classical liberals like someone like Herbert Spencer. I mean, they come after Darwin. The basic idea though is that when we see evolutionary theory, it's not going to apply to the early economists like Adam Smith, those individuals so much, but essentially what they'll do is they'll take evolutionary theory and apply it to social outcomes. That'll be the idea in our nutshell. No problem. But yeah, and as James noticed, again, they've known this property, right? Liberalism in the perimeter, classical liberalism, property moves to a core concept here. Oh wow. Jake? 

Speaker 7: Progress is now an adjacent. 

Speaker 1: Progress is now an adjacent concept. Do you have any thoughts? Yeah. And we'll see why, yeah, with that. So, yeah, so those are the main couple of differences there. So let's start with the concept of freedom here. 

Okay. How does classical liberalism interpret freedom? Well, classical liberalism has a relatively simple interpretation of freedom. Classical liberalism adopts only again the negative aspect of non-constraint. That is, other individuals, right, including the government, should not interfere with our actions through force of coercion. So here, from the classical liberal perspective, we're only working with the negative conception of freedom as non-interference. So constraints only refer to, again, the actions of other individuals. 

Okay. So this means that from the classical liberal perspective, classical liberalism rejects both the positive conception of freedom and it rejects this idea that constraints may be expanded to include social and economic circumstances. I'm a little confused by the internal constraints though. 

Speaker 10: Like this is the second bullet point. 

Speaker 1: So in what aspect? 

Speaker 7: Like what's a social constraint in that context? 

Speaker 1: So the economic constraint against something like, again, just not having enough wealth, the source of things, right, maybe again, from the liberal perspective, that could be seen as a constraint, right, to develop our individuality as a limitation of our freedom. The classical liberal would not recognize that as a limitation on our freedom. Yeah, and then in rejecting the positive freedom, this means so all of those like internal aspects, right, that could have limited our freedom, the lack of autonomy from the classical liberal perspective. 

Again, those are not seen as limitations or constraints on our freedom. Yeah. Yeah, so it's just the negative aspect of non-interference. So here are a couple of examples just to sort of illustrate this. 

Oh, that. Okay, so here is what Friedrich Hayek says. He says, freedom describes the absence of a particular obstacle, coercion by other men. Okay, coercion by other individuals. By coercion, we mean control of the environment or circumstances of a person by another. Another example, freedom thus presupposes that the individual has some assured private sphere, that there is some sphere of circumstances in his environment in which others cannot interfere. Okay. Herbert Spencer, freedom is being left secure in person in possessions to save these, to satisfy ones wants with the proceeds. Okay. 

So very different interpretation of freedom. So which one do we like better here? Yasmin? Combative, okay. Right, yeah, that's a good point. Yeah, maybe the government is gonna come and tax us and take all of our money and wealth. So, mm-hmm, great. 

Speaker 7: This one leaves far less room for interpretation. It's very straightforward. There's not much thickness to it. Okay. However, I do think I prefer the one that gives some positive freedoms that sort of advances toward a goal rather than just being purely, don't mess with me. Okay, okay. Yeah, what about others? Any sort of a preference between these two conceptions of freedom? 

Speaker 1: I think I prefer this one just because like Jake was saying, it's very straightforward. And I think what we were talking about earlier, it's just hard to kind of define the positive freedom and what that really means. And just like, I think it gets a little bit more loose there. 

So, as I was saying previously, you know, for a societal kind of thing, boiling it down to just the negative aspect and then maybe as a personal kind of thing, you could, you know, I don't know, implement or positive freedom elements. 

Speaker 1: Are there any sort of a preference between the two? Between the liberal interpretation of freedom versus the classical liberal one we're seeing here? Again, it's definitely a much sort of like thinner right conception of freedom since again, it's getting rid of all of that sort of the positive freedom, all of that sort of stuff. Again, all we're concerned about here, one obstacle, coercion forced by other individuals, including the government here. That's the only limitation of freedom we're concerned about. 

Speaker 11: Question, so in terms of coercion, I'm just wondering when did classical liberalism emerge? Did it emerge before the capitalism? Or I mean, since right now, coercion can be implemented by the companies rather than the government. 

Speaker 1: Right, good. So, early thinkers a bit before capitalism and then the earliest width is sort of rise to development of capitalism. Now, in regards to your second point, they would not recognize that sort of coercion as a limitation on our freedom. So like, this will be a significant contrast with socialism, so for Marx and socialist, the idea that workers have a choice between working and starving means essentially that all of our work is coerced to a certain degree. From the classical liberal perspective, they would not essentially recognize having to make these sorts of, let's say, tough choices as a form of coercion. Coercion is something that can only be implemented by other individuals, not by, let's say, life. Unless again, systems, right, environment, these sorts of things, unless again, somehow, in created, imposed intentionally by other individuals. 

Okay, let's, we can start the next concept and I'll just throw it up here. Here is how classical liberals interpret human nature. Self-interested, competitive, and entrepreneurial. That is, they see individuals as, again, being able to take initiatives, risks, seek out new opportunities, being creative. 

They also, again, engage in maximizing behavior. Okay. So I know this is only the first slide about this, but Brooks, you were the one who had mentioned like the optimistic nature of liberalism regarding human nature. Just at least, just seeing going off of base on this slide, what might be your sort of like initial impression of the classical liberal? 

Okay. So, I mean, we're like the nihilistic view of human nature. Just like everybody's trying to get ahead of more of us. Like the first one, self-interested. Yeah. Oh, my good, yeah. 

Speaker 13: So, what is the thought of all of this? 

Speaker 1: So, something to keep in mind, yeah, as we go further in classical liberalism, Benita? 

Speaker 6: I agree with this, we're going to improve human nature a lot more, I think, but it's almost very, yeah, optimistic and feeling of, example of students being self-interested and competitive by nature. I think like, if they weren't, you wouldn't have to be teaching preschoolers like how to share, you know, like do things like that. That's something that you often still in people. So, they're just saying like, oh, not everyone's just about you. That's right, good. 

Speaker 1: Any other just initial thoughts on human nature here, Seth? 

Speaker 12: Yeah, I feel like you probably add in some evolutionary theory in here and argue that, you know, evolutionary speaking, you're not gonna survive on your own. And so, in that lens, like, I think this lacks a little bit of nuance that maybe in the future, you know, could be added on, which is that like, yes, we're self-interested, but we're also like very social beings. And so, this feels like, just like, extremely individualistic, which I think like, goes against evolutionary theory. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's a good point, and it just comes back to, when we look at, there's no sociability on good here, something to keep in mind. 

Speaker 1: It takes in different colonies. Then some areas would at least emphasize, you know, promoting better social conditions that allow individuals to acquire property in order to market. What about? We'd say this is the danger side to democracy. Yeah, yeah. What we're going to see, though, is from the revolutionary, sort of the sort of revolutionary aspect. So once we've got the sort of founding of the constitution, we'll see more limitations on this. Essentially, again, yeah, the general idea here is that we see that, again, the founders of the US constitution have the exact same sort of concerns about democracy that they'll have. 

And so this led them to qualify, again, the right to vote in a variety of different ways. So in some ways, again, what we'll see is that the American constitution sort of represents a retreat from the, again, revolutionary period. And what some of the families were thinking about one day, again, it's heavily related to the constitution. Someone like, again, James Madison, one of the principal authors of the constitution, once again, he's held very similar concerns as John Stuart Mill, about just giving sort of everyone a sort of unqualified right to vote. So what we see, one of Madison's main concerns here is that, again, he wanted to ensure that the constitution was set up in a number of different ways, again, to make it more difficult, particularly for states, to interfere with individual property rights. 

That was a key aspect here. And what we see is that those are property qualifications that were necessary to vote. Those, again, became more prominent during the constitutional time framework period compared to, again, the revolutionary period. And so what we see, it's actually not, again, until the 1820s. So again, much later, in which many states started abolishing property qualifications. So again, what we see here is even from the American perspective, the idea here is that it's not really the case that everyone right is going to have the right to vote. 

It's only certain individuals, i.e. in this case first, right, originally men, white men who owned property would have the right to vote. So these, again, property qualifications were necessary and in order to have that right to participate in politics, and again, it wasn't until, again, the 1860s in which all states finally abolished those property qualifications as a necessary condition in order to vote. So this is, again, one example here in which we see the right to vote being qualified. One qualification here, again, is property. You have to have property in order to vote. 

Then, of course, again, we have the racial qualifications. So in this case, again, even though African Americans were only technically granted the right to vote in the 1870s in the Reconstruction period after the Civil War, again, what's interesting in this point, too, is they were able to enjoy their right to vote for a short period, about, again, five, 10 years after the Civil War during the Reconstruction. But then what we see is in the period following the Reconstruction, again, there was significant pushback from, again, whites, particularly in the South, to deny African Americans the right to vote. And so it wasn't, again, until the 15th Amendment was amended to the Constitution that this, again, became a guaranteed right to vote. And then, again, last, in the case of women, we also see here, again, it wasn't until 1920 that women were granted the right to vote. So, again, the point here is that even though we see this initial commitment to democracy, the key thing to take away is that it was a very, very qualified form of democracy. 

Not everyone was just granted the right to vote here. And again, I think we see this both in the American case and, again, in the English case with John Stuart Mill as well. And I think, again, excluding, I mean, these concerns, these two here, at least in the case of the property one, and particularly with Mill, again, Mill's concern was that individuals hadn't yet developed their rational capacities in order to be able to really exercise their right to vote. 

And as we saw last time, he thought, again, the majority of the population was just very uneducated, very bigoted in prejudice. And so he thought that until people had developed their rational capacities, then, again, the right to vote would have to be qualified in different ways. One interesting thing, though, about John Stuart Mill, though, so, I mean, in the American case, right, women were granted the right to vote in 1920. So John Stuart Mill was actually one of the first proponents of arguing for women to have the right to vote back in the 1850s and 1860s here. 

So he was, again, in that sense, a precursor. And again, I mean, this sort of, again, raises at least for Mill, right, and from the liberal perspective. So I've read you all that passage last time, right? Again, the idea here we see is that liberalism, at least in its early stages, right, had this very sort of ambivalent view regarding democracy. And I think, again, the key thing, that explains why democracy occupies this sort of adjacent position within liberalism rather than a core position within its core. But again, I think the key thing here is, especially for someone like Mill, is he didn't see this sort of relatively diminished importance of democracy as a permanent feature of liberalism, right? Because for him, with his belief, he had Mill especially had a very sort of optimistic view that he thought human society would be able to make progress and more and more individuals would develop their rational capacities. So for him, as society made progress and more and more individuals developed their rational capacities, you would remove many of these qualifications on the right to vote and include more and more members of society within that. And so then what we would see from Mill's perspective is we would see democracy move from its adjacent position into the core of liberalism. But that's, again, only once we've reached that sort of point. 

But again, at least from Mill's perspective, he was pretty optimistic that something like that could happen in the future. Okay, another aspect here too that we see, again, from the US perspective, right, is that, I mean, the way our government is structured and the way that our constitution is structured, right, is that it's not an instance of direct democracy. So again, in many cases, it's not that individuals, again, the sort of mass public are directly voting on policy proposals. 

No, okay. In some cases, this is true, right? Sometimes they're presented on the ballot, but in general, right, the idea here is that the founders of the constitution actually formed the electoral college. Its purpose was initially to sort of filter the opinions of much of the public. Okay, so again, the idea here, right, is that citizens would vote for specific electors and then the electors would come amongst themselves and then decide how to cast their votes for the present. Okay, so in this way, originally, the purpose of the electoral college was, again, designed to sort of filter the opinions of much of the public. 

Okay. And so it actually wasn't until, again, the election in 1824 when then the electors were then expected to use the votes of the popular count as the basis for how they were supposed to vote. Okay, so what this means is that in the elections between or before 1824, electors could, again, vote in a way that didn't necessarily match with, let's say, the popular vote of how the citizens were voted. 

Okay. But again, it wasn't until the election in 1824 that they then used that as a guide for how to cast their own votes. Of course, I mean, I guess in a certain extent today, we just see, right, the electoral college functioning in this sort of sense here. So are there any questions, I guess, or impressions about the sort of American perspective or liberalisms, again, sort of ambivalent view regarding democracy here? Is that... 

Speaker 2: Were the electors elected representatives at the time or... 

Speaker 1: You mean by... So the idea was that the citizens would vote for, their votes would go for these, picking these electors. And then so the electors would then essentially convene amongst themselves and then decide how to cast their votes. Gotcha. 

Yeah, for the president, yeah. So again, it's interesting though, right? Is that it's an initial sort of function, again, was this idea sort of filtering the opinions, right? Of again, the sort of mass public. The electors were expected to be sort of, I guess, more sort of intelligent, less biased individuals who would cast their votes in again, in a more sort of impartial, less self-interested manner. Okay, so any other questions about, again, the sort of role of democracy here? Okay, so we can go ahead and move on to one of the, next adjacent concepts within liberalism, which is the concept of equality. So the general idea, I think, from the liberal perspective of equality, is that equality liberals would see individuals as having sort of equal moral work, okay? 

And so what this meant is that on the basis of this equal moral work, individuals should enjoy the same legal and political rights, okay? Another aspect here too that is important from the liberal perspective is again, the reduction of economic inequalities in society. In many cases, the important here, so I say right there, viewed as sort of irrelevant differences between individuals, and this is because again, many liberals would see sort of the distribution of wealth as sort of, again, either accidents of society or again, consequences of the ways in which society were set up, okay? This is important because this will be again, a significant difference in the way how sort of liberals and socialists explain the distribution of wealth compared to someone like conservatives or even classical liberals, okay? So like, from the conservative perspective, what we'll see is that the distribution of income and wealth is largely attributed right to the actions of individuals, okay? 

Rather than the features of the economic system itself, okay? So because again, liberals view it in this way, and because of their commitment to something like individuality and the development of our rational capacities, that leads them again to view too much economic inequality as a problem that has to be addressed in society, okay? Now again, perhaps one thing to keep in mind here too, is that perhaps even though both liberalism and what we'll see socialism share this concern, a significant difference between the two is that liberals still thought that capitalism was a system, economic system worth preserving, okay? And they still thought again, it would be the most efficient economic system. It's just that again, you essentially had to regulate capitalism and make it conducive to the development of individual rational capacities, okay? Whereas from the socialist perspective, even though they may share these concerns here, we'll see again, they don't share the same sort of theoretical commitment to capitalism as an economic system, okay? And then again, lastly, this point here about again, equality of opportunity, right? So the idea here is, does anybody remember what a formal equality of opportunity is? Jake? It's where everyone regardless of their starting point is given the same arc, each apply for a job for example, or the same like the chance to do 

Speaker 3: something, but they're not supported in any way at all. 

Speaker 1: Right, right. Yeah, so the sort of metaphor I was using, it's like a formal equality of opportunity, right? Just says everyone should be allowed to run the race, okay? So no one should be prevented from applying for jobs, okay? Based on again, things like race, gender, sexual orientation, religious beliefs, okay? 

Ethnicity, nothing like this. So again, the idea is formal equality says everyone should be able to run the race, okay? What we'll see is that classical liberalism is committed to this idea of formal equality, okay? Liberalism however, goes beyond that, okay? And liberalism will support something like substantive equality of opportunity, which often means addressing the sort of background inequalities that affect people's ability to run the race, so to speak. 

Okay, so for instance, again, if formal equality just says everyone should be able to run the race, you know, not everyone's going to be starting the race from the same starting point, right? Some people may be farther ahead than others, some people may have had access to trainers in order to prepare for running the race. They may have access to better running shoes. 

Some people may be running the race with, you know, weights attached to their ankles, right? All of this affects their ability, right, to achieve that particular outcome that they're all striving for. So substantive equality of opportunity seeks to address some of those background inequalities, okay? 

So again, this may mean things like, again, like public education, making sure everyone has access to an education to allow them to develop the qualifications that they would need in order to compete for various drugs, okay? So in this way, the substantive equality of opportunity goes beyond the formal version of equality of opportunity. And in many cases, this requires reducing economic inequalities because economic inequalities are a significant source of background inequalities, okay? 

Well, those with more wealth and income right can give themselves more advantages when it comes to, again, competing for different jobs. So from the liberal perspective, this was something that would have to be addressed. And so these two things would work in tandem with each other in that way. Now lastly, when we look at equality, again, the idea here, and this is, I think, is something important to keep in mind from both the liberal and socialist perspective. So one thing we're going to see is that both conservatives, libertarians, and classical liberals, they will accuse liberals and socialists for being committed to a conception of equality that is supposedly committed to these sorts of things, okay? And both liberals and socialists, I think, go to, or at least attempt to go to great lengths to deny that sort of interpretation. 

No problem. And so I think this brings up another sort of thing to keep in mind too is, you know, when you're sort of like reading the works of, let's say, a thinker working in one tradition, you'll have to also pay attention to, you know, if they're criticizing, let's say, another ideology like liberalism, you always have to pay attention to to how they're sort of characterizing, right? The ideology to criticize, okay? Because it raises a question, you know, are these sorts of beliefs that liberals or socialists or whatever ideology is would take themselves to be committed to? Or is the sort of author thinking here sort of creating a straw man, right? And attacking a sort of different version of that ideology that those, the proponents of that ideology wouldn't even follow, okay? So again, for like many socialists, they would argue, you know, that they're not, again, trying to bring about a completely equal distribution of income and wealth, despite, again, what their critics may say, okay? 

So I think that's one thing to always keep in mind there as well, okay? So one of the other adjacent concepts that Frieden mentions for liberalism is the concept of property. But I'm not gonna mention too much about that because what we're also going to see is that from the, once we get to the new liberalism, the concept of property moves to the perimeter of liberalism. 

Okay, so that means it moves from the adjacency to the outer bounds of liberalism. And so what this means is that property becomes a very sort of concept of very diminished value within the liberal framework, okay? On the one hand, in so far as liberals are still committed to capitalism, they still see property as necessary to incentivize work, okay? Property is still necessary, you know? 

We all rely on having personal, private property, things like that. But again, what we're gonna see, especially when we get to new liberalism, is that liberals were very concerned about the unequal concentration of property in society. And again, they felt that that was inimical to the development of individuals' rational capacities. 

So in many cases, again, this meant that property rights had to be limited in ways that made it compatible with and conducive to the development of our individual. Okay, so at this point, this sort of finishes our initial discussion of liberalism. So what are people's impressions regarding liberalism as a political ideology? Are there any things, again, you find either particularly attractive or concerning potentially problematic? We're just no opinions regarding liberalism at all. Emily? Yeah, I think at least 

Speaker 4: from an American upbringing, I think that people might be a little more generally predisposed to some of these ideas of liberalism, like things like freedom and democracy are things that I would consider to be very American ideals and that Americans identify very heavily with them. So I thought that was interesting. Considering that I don't necessarily think that every American would consider themselves liberal. Some of those ideas are still very important. 

Speaker 1: Right, right. It is, yeah, there's a certain sense. I mean, when we talk about liberal democracy, not as part of liberalism as an ideology, but when people refer to the idea of liberal democracy, what they're talking about are just a basic commitment to something like democracy as a political system, a commitment to civil rights for individuals and the rule of law, these sorts of things. So in that sense, those are things that many Americans would probably take themselves the activity committed to. So any other thoughts regarding liberalism at this point? 

Speaker 5: Brooks? It has like one issue, I don't know how it was, like it has two rows of view of human nature. Okay, good. It assumes that people are always hoping for the best for others, like for others, I think it could be more pragmatic. 

Speaker 1: And then it goes to these things. Good, yeah. So that's an interesting point. What we'll see is that maybe when we get to some of the other ideologies, they'll have sort of different conceptions of human nature. So maybe in that sense, perhaps more realistic, so yeah. So yeah, what do others feel about that? Do others feel again that liberalism either has a few sort of rosy interpretation of human nature? 

Is it on the one hand, perhaps a two sort of elitist view of human nature, right, saying that the goal of our life is development of our rational capacities? Is that right, a sort of potential concern? Do we sort of feel about those aspects? 

Speaker 4: I think it definitely also takes an optimistic view of like human rationality, and it kind of assumes that people are generally pretty rational, or at least that like the people at the top, like the most average people are always going to act rationally, which I don't believe to be true. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something I think Mill certainly thought that. He thought with more intelligence, generally people who would be more moral, and so yeah, there's probably a good reason to question. 

Speaker 3: So, Jake. I think it certainly takes off with perspective as to the goal of people as well. I think a lot of people, sorry, a lot of people are not necessarily aiming as their main goal to increase their rationality, their overall intelligence. There's other things like money or success that I think often motivate people more than just purely increase their rationality, and I think in an ideal world, it'd be great if everyone was rational as possible, but I think there's a lot of other attempts to do other things that make people inclined to pursue actions that may increase their wealth, increase their health, but it may not be in a pursuit of becoming a more rational being. Right, right. 

Speaker 1: But here's I think maybe a question to think about since several of you have mentioned, maybe again the sort of view of human nature's to optimistic here, I guess the thing to maybe think about with that is, do we think that's necessarily a problem or not? 

Because maybe liberalism will say, yeah, I mean maybe it is an optimistic view of human nature, but isn't it good to have this sort of aspirational view of human nature in which our goal is to try to improve society and bring about these changes instead of maybe having a more sort of negative view of human nature where then we're saying, we might say, okay, well what's the point of trying to improve things if human beings are fundamentally bad or flawed, right? Aspirin, Cullen, and then Bo, you had your hand up before, right? 

Speaker 5: Yeah, so I'm sorry. Oh, yeah. I think it just adds an extra layer to humans and being rational, because I think with other political ideologies, it's more of a, yeah, humans are not rational. And this is like, well, they can become rational, or even the ones on top, which are us, are more inherently. 

Speaker 1: Right, right. Again, I think it's definitely, since Brooks, you started the discussion on this, I think it's a good observation to make, right? And it's something you'll definitely want to pay attention to when we get to classical liberalism and conservatism in particular, because what we'll see with both of those ideologies is they don't have the same optimistic view of human nature, right? And so we'll want to think about what extent that maybe leads to sort of shaping and influencing other aspects of their ideology, right? And what sort of implications that also has from a policy standpoint as well. So, Bo? 

Speaker 6: Yeah, I was going to say, I think at the beginning, everybody would have said that they thought quality was more of like a core concept. Good, Brian. But I think I see now that freedom and individuality are more of a core concept in liberalism. Right. I think equality is a connotation of being inclusive. And it's nowadays, like both political parties care about individuality just within their party, people agree with that. It's not necessarily an inclusive way of thinking. 

Speaker 1: Right. And yeah, what we're going to see too, because an interesting difference, at least according to freedom between liberalism and socialism, is again, I mean, many times, right, people mistaked it too. But Frieden argues that, you know, liberalism, freedom is a core, right, of liberalism. But what we'll see with socialism is reverse. Equality is a core concept of socialism. Whereas it's just that freedom is an adjacent concept with socialism. So that would be a sort of significant conceptual difference between liberalism and socialism. Is it said beneath them? 

Speaker 7: Would a bill, liberalism, whatever, would they say that they want to set up society in a way where people should be developing the rational capacity or just that people can develop the rational capacity? 

Speaker 1: I mean, I think they would say both, but we'll see again with, when we get to TH Green, is I mean, the idea is to encourage them to develop the rational capacities, but that would be like the extent of it. So encourage and incentivize these sorts of things. Yeah. Seth, did you need to? 

Speaker 2: I guess my thought was like, I thought that was interesting about like liberalism being splintered between like social rationality and individual rationality. So like, you know, just because an individual is trying to achieve, you know, their rational goals, well, maybe that's not kind of what's best for social rationality, but maybe that's not what's best for the liberal view of equality, right? So I feel like there is that, you know, tension there between the individual and social that I'm necessarily feel like it's fully addressed in the millet liberalism. Yeah. 

Speaker 1: Yeah. I think you're right about that. I think the last time two people were bringing up questions right about the sort of tension between like individuality and the common good. And so we'll go into that in more detail with TH Green and the new liberalism to see if it's, you feel like it better addresses that sort of tension there. So and then again, I mean, another point just to keep in mind on the idea of the social rationalization, that social rationality, this is again going to be a significant difference between liberalism and socialism versus conservatism, classical liberalism and libertarianism. These three latter ideologies are all going to criticize liberalism and socialism precisely for the fact that they believe that liberals and socialists think that they can sort of promote this end goal. And classical liberals, conservatives and libertarians are all going to say is that when you mess around with society too much and you try to rationalize it too much to, you know, fix too many different problems, what you're going to do is create more problems in the end. Oh, wow. And so from their perspective, in many cases, the best thing is to do is to let things run with as much, with as little interference as possible. The more you interfere with these things, the more problems you're going to create. No problem. 

Speaker 8: I was just curious about, like, with people that maybe don't reach the rational capacity very well, like in society today we would equate them with people who might face the criminal justice system, right, crimes and stuff like that. I was just wondering how, like, liberalism would view the current criminal justice system and what their, like, alternative would be because in my mind, what I feel like the current criminal justice system goes against practically everything that's given to your rational capacities and allowing people to, like, progress. 

Speaker 1: So that's a good question. One thing I'll say is it's a, one thing maybe you all should do sometime where we're going through the semester is write down some of these ideas as paper topics because that might be a good paper topic to pursue. So then that way you're not thinking of a paper topic literally the last week of the class. But yeah, so I think that might be, like, again, a good paper topic to pursue. But I think, again, from the general liberal perspective, again, they would say, yeah, that, again, liberal idea, current, you know, system of punishment is not, again, perhaps in a way that's conducive, right, to the development of individuals' rational capacities. 

And so there would have to be sort of adjustments made about things like that. So, like, one example I could give of, you know, in the past, so Alexander de Tocqueville, right, when he wrote his book Coming to America, more like, again, the 1830s or whatever, he had a very, very long sections about the prison system in the U.S. at the time and how there were two different, there were two different main prison systems. One was like the Pennsylvania system, and then the other one I can't remember that I name off the top of my head. But the latter system was like designed in such a way where the prisoners would be completely isolated and separated from each other. 

And he found that that was very problematic. Whereas the other sort of prison system was designed in such a way where not only were they, but it was designed in such a way that would allow them to engage in different forms of work and activities that allowed them to develop their rational capacities. So even at that point, there were sort of fundamentally different philosophies about how to sort of approach the prison system in the U.S. 

Speaker 8: So I'm assuming that they would be against what the life sentence in prison and things like that. 

Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess on that extent, it would probably depend on the liberal thinker, I think, in that extent. Yeah, it would, I think, vary from thinker to thinker. Wendy? 

Speaker 9: I was just going to ask a question about methodology. Does that mean like each individual or group of people have given the same resources and opportunities? Or does that mean like actually like each person has different circumstances and allocate the same resources and opportunity that can reach an equal level? 

Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it would be more along the lines of the second thing you said, right? So again, the idea here, right, is that given that people are starting from different equal positions, right, they would need to access a different source of resources, things like that, right, in order to be able to develop their rational capacities. So again, yeah, maybe the basic way of thinking about it is like, again, even, you know, the poor individuals in society, the lower middle classes, right, should have access to various resources that would allow them to develop their rational capacities. And again, this would mean not only things like education, but maybe getting access to things like health care, these sorts of things as well. So what does the difference 

Speaker 9: between the faculty or equality of the middle class versus the second one? I was curious. 

Speaker 1: I mean, we'll get to it, I guess, in a bit more detail when we get to socialism. I guess, I mean, for now, I would say, again, think about it in terms of the liberal is always thinking about equality with this goal of, you know, promoting the development of our rational capacities, and it has to work within this sort of capitalistic framework. We'll see, again, that there's going to be a number of similarities between sort of how they interpret the conception of equality. But we'll get into it in more detail when we get to socialism, because then we'll have more to work with there. 

Speaker 5: All right. 

Speaker 1: So at this point, then, let's go ahead and move to new liberalism. 

Speaker 10: So let me see here. 

Speaker 1: So again, here's the thing to keep in mind about new liberalism, right, for a few general things, right? New liberalism tends to be sort of the views associated with a number of different liberal thinkers in England, like, again, the philosopher Th Green, L.T. 

Hopphaus, and Hopson. There are all various liberal thinkers, again, writing in England from the 1880s to the 1920s approximately. Now, what we're also going to see, again, is that new liberalism is, again, it's called new liberalism because it's contrasted with classical liberalism. For our purposes, you always want to treat new liberalism and millite liberalism as essentially the same. So from now on, when I say liberalism, it'll refer to either of these two. And the reason is because when we look at the core concepts, right, here's the core concepts, they're all the same as liberalism. The only difference here, okay, is that the concept of sociability is replaced by the concept of the common good. 

And then what we're also going to see, again, in the adjacent concepts, the only difference here, what happens, is that the concept of property moves out of the adjacency and is replaced by the concept of distinct. So, again, I think the best way to sort of understand new liberalism is just as a sort of evolution of the millite liberalism. And so, again, just think of the millite liberalism and new liberalism as liberalism. So this is also why that when we discuss this new liberalism, I'm not going to go over all of these concepts again because they share similar interpretations. I just want to say a few things about, again, their concept of freedom, how a green interprets the concept of freedom and its connection with the common good, since we've also seen this come up in discussion before. 

And then we'll also see how, again, new liberals, right, attach a sort of more expansive function to the state. Okay, so like I said, I'm not going to go over all of these concepts again because, especially, again, concepts like power, progress, rationality, they're all, again, very similar. I just want to say a few things about the concept of freedom because especially in the case of C.H. 

Green, he develops this notion of positive freedom a bit more than mill does. So I want to say a bit more about what that means. And then, again, we'll see what sort of connection these two concepts here have to the promotion of the common good. Okay, so let's start with this idea of freedom. 

So here's a few quotations right from the textbook. So here's what freedom, Frieden says about freedom. He says, freedom does not mean that the person or will is undetermined, nor yet does it mean mere self-determination. It means a particular kind of self-determination. 

And here's another one. He says, freedom is not constituted by the mere fact of acting upon preference, whatever that preference might be, but depends wholly on the nature of the preference. So he says, upon the kind of object will, will or prefer. So by freedom, we mean a positive power of capacity of doing something worth doing. Okay, so just based on these quotations and then maybe based on your reading response today, what was your sort of like general understanding of the way in which Green interprets the concept of freedom? 

Speaker 8: Benizo? Not doing anything in everything that you want. It has to be morally correct and also promoting the common good. 

Speaker 1: Okay, right. What else? 

Speaker 4: Emily? That if you're free to do everything, some of your actions might impact the freedom of everyone overall and so you should not be allowed to do those kinds of actions if they're going to impact other people's freedoms. Oh, uh, uh, oh. So would the I see for freedom you still be non-constrained? 

Speaker 1: It is, yeah, yeah. The I see will still be non-constrained. 

Speaker 5: There's no like overarching correct definition of what freedom is. 

Speaker 6: On the individual level, there is like a moral 

Speaker 5: directive of what you should be doing. 

Speaker 1: Right, yeah. I mean, like when you all see these quotations here, what's like the sort of theme that sort of is sailing is just based on these sorts of quotations here? I guess like self-development or improvement because it's not just about doing 

Speaker 7: whatever I can do, it's about trying to become a more rational person. 

Speaker 1: Right, right. Again, what we see here right is again, notice the parts I emphasize in the first quotation right a particular kind of self determination. Again, not doing whatever I want. Not following acting upon any preference I have, right? Again, depends on the preference I'm acting upon, right? 

Again, here, the positive power of doing something worth doing, right? So what we see again similar in the way that Mill talks about individuality as well, right? In the same way that Mill interprets individuality. There's again these sort of almost sort of objective components, objective elements being introduced into the interpretation of freedom here. It's not again simply this negative idea of freedom where we're just free to pursue whatever desire, whatever preference we have. Okay, again, this is going to be an important difference particularly when we compare liberalism to classical liberalism and libertarianism. For the classical liberal, they're going to say, look, freedom is important because you allow individuals to pursue whatever their preferences are. The only qualification on that from the classical liberal and libertarian perspective, right, is if we have preferences to harm others to violate their rights, that can't be permitted, right? But besides that, the idea here is it doesn't matter how stupid or idiotic a person's preferences are. 

If they want to go out and do something ridiculous, I don't know, like, I can't think of anything ridiculous off the top of my head, but like, if they just want to waste their money on all sorts of ridiculous stuff, that's up to them to do. Okay. But again, what we're seeing here from the liberal perspective is there's sort of these objective components being sort of incorporated within our understanding of freedom here. 

Okay. So again, what are exactly these objective components? What are these objectively valuable things worth doing? So, and this comes back again as to what you mentioned and some of you others mentioned, right, it comes back to this idea of self-development. Okay. So the development of our rational capacities here, right, is interpreting the objectively worthwhile ways in which we can exercise our freedom. Okay. And again, for green also, this includes again a sort of moral component as well as part of those objectively valuable things. 

Okay. So in this way, again, freedom is not once related. It's not, again, just simply preference-driven. 

This is how we'll see, again, the classical liberal interprets freedom. Okay. Follow whatever your heart desires. Doesn't matter. Okay. And again, but this is a conception of freedom that's very different from the liberal perspective. 

Okay. So this sort of wants related, again, takes us to this sort of negative conception of freedom, right? As we saw, the negative conception of freedom says that there should be no external constraints. 

Okay. And these external constraints are interpreted in a very specific way. They refer to the actions of other individuals and the state. Okay. So it's, again, just this idea that others should not interfere with our actions. 

Okay. They should not prevent us from pursuing, again, whatever our preferences are. What we see, though, is that the positive conception of freedom, it still takes on board this negative aspect, but it adds more to it. 

Okay. So the idea here is that from the liberal perspective and from the understanding of positive freedom, the idea here is that there also shouldn't be sort of internal constraints that are preventing us from achieving, pursuing what we believe to be our sort of true selves or our true desires. And so the idea here, right, is from the perspective of these liberals, it's like individuals almost have this sort of conception of freedom. It's called a divided self in society. We can think of ourselves as having this sort of like higher self that reflects our true desires. Okay. And then we have, let's say, maybe this lower self and this lower self may reflect all sorts of desires that we have, but they don't, again, reflect those true desires. 

There's a distinction between the two. Okay. Now, one way we can sort of think about this, right, is, again, maybe the idea here is that, you know, especially, I think, from the liberal perspective is they would say all of the desires that are sort of associated with our lower selves, these often tend to be the desires that we sort of develop as a product of living in our environment in our circumstances. Okay. So often they'll point to here as, you know, when we have sort of either very materialistic desires, desires focused around consumption, these sorts of things. Okay. In these cases, right, they may see these desires as not necessarily reflecting the desires of our true selves, but these are just desires that we've acquired through the constant bombardment of advertising and marketing and these sorts of things. 

Right. So when we get this desire that, oh man, I really need to go buy this new car. That'll, you know, make me feel better about myself. It'll make me happy, so on and so forth. From the liberal perspective, these sorts of desires may not actually be representative of my true desires of what I really desire as a person. Okay. So this notion of positive freedom here, what it means is one important aspect here is that an individual has to engage in this process of autonomous reflection to identify what exactly are my true desires in life. What exactly do I want to pursue in life? 

Speaker 9: Wendy. I can't agree more because later on in the passage, I said, I agree as an idealist. He regards the mission to the state's power as the rational self-regulation because they share these ends with others and they have their personal and collective progress, our mutuality, reinforcing. Right. 

I more agree with the political obligation in the sense that it's like closely tied to structural tolerance because there should be an individual agency and like ask the society of progress. Right, right. 

Speaker 1: But that also again, importantly mentions the connection here between that and the common good here, right? And this is something that some of you were asking about last time, right? Again, doesn't there seem to be again a sort of tension here in liberal thought, right, between the individual and common good? And I again mentioned last time that we should understand liberalism, right, as trying to find a balance between a number of these different values, right? And so the question is, do we think it can strike a proper balance? 

So here's how T.H. Green attempts to strike the balance between the individual, the importance of the individual on one hand and the importance of the common good on the other. So the first idea here, right, is that ultimately liberals see the relationship between the individual and the common good in society as a mutually reciprocal one, okay? 

A mutually beneficial relationship. So the idea, the first idea here, right, is that society provides the resources necessary to allow individuals to pursue self development, okay? And as we saw again, it doesn't coerce them, okay? Individuals, again, still have their native rights to pursue whatever their preference is on, okay? But again, the idea here is society provides those resources, okay? Then Green also mentions that when we see the state as providing these resources for everyone, what is happening here, right, is that the state is recognizing this important aspect for all individuals, okay? It recognizes all individuals as persons who have this need for self development here. 

Oh, wow. Then, so the idea here is, right, the state recognizes this provides those resources for individuals. Then when individuals develop themselves, the idea here is that the more self-developed individuals we have in society, more individuals who have developed their rational capacities, they end up contributing to and bettering society. And so here, again, we have this sort of mutually reciprocal perpetual relationship, okay? Society provides the resources that allows us individuals to develop. 

Once individuals develop, they further contribute to a society which provides those resources to individuals, and you get this self-preserving cycle. So again, here I have a quote from Frieden. So he says, liberation of powers implies the unleashing and consequent natural working out of human potential. That potential is made available for social purposes, okay? So again, the idea here, right, you provide more education to people. You're going to end up with a more educated populace, okay? 

That they're going to contribute to society in all sorts of a number of different ways. And that'll help, again, preserve this cycle here. So in this way, again, T.H. Green is trying to sort of alleviate that conflict between, again, the individual and the common good, because he's trying to argue, again, that they're mutually beneficial here. So any questions about the connection between these two? Okay, so we're about out of time. So what we're going to do next time, we'll finish up our discussion of... 